[1]	91.	The mind is luminous, but it is stained by defilements that come from without.  Ordinary folk do not realize this, so they do not cultivate the mind.  The mind is luminous, but it can be cleansed of defilements that come from without.  This the noble disciples understand, so they do cultivate the mind.[2]	92.	Who is one's own best friend, and who is one's own worst enemy?  Those whose thoughts, speech and actions are evil, they are their own worst enemy.  Even if they were to say: "We care about ourselves," nevertheless they would be their own worst enemy.  And why?  Because that which one would do to an enemy, they do to themselves.  Those whose thoughts, speech and actions are good, they are their own best friends.  Even if they were to say: "We don't care about ourselves," nevertheless they would be their own best friend.  And why?  Because that which one would do to a friend, they do to themselves.[3]	93.	Greed, hatred and delusion are unskillful.  Whatever the greedy, hating or deluded person does with body, speech or mind - that is unskillful, also.  Whatever one overwhelmed by greed, hatred or delusion, with mind uncontrolled, does to another, unjustly causing him suffering through punishment, imprisonment, fine, abuse, banishment, or on the grounds that "might is right" - all that is unskillful, too.[4]	94.	Four things lead to worldly progress:  achievement in alertness, in caution, in good friendship and achievement in balanced livelihood.  And what is achievement in alertness?  Concerning this, in whatever way one earns a living, whether by farming, trading, cattle rearing, archery, service to the king or by some craft, in that one becomes deft and tireless, gifted with an inquiring turn of mind into ways and means, and able to arrange and carry out the job.	And what is achievement in caution?  Concerning this, whatever one earns by work and effort, collected by strength of arm and sweat of brow in a just and lawful manner, one husbands, watches and guards so that kings do not seize it, thieves do not steal it, fire or water do not destroy it, and unwanted heirs do not remove it.	And what is good friendship?  Concerning this, in whatever village or town one lives, one associates with, converses with, discusses things with people either young or old, who are cultured, full of faith, full of virtue, full of charity and full of wisdom.  One acts in accordance with the faith of the faithful, the virtue of the virtuous, the charity of the charitable and the wisdom of the wise.	And what is balanced livelihood?  Concerning this, one knows both his income and expenditure and lives neither extravagantly nor miserly, knowing that income after expenditure will stand at so much and that expenses will not exceed income.  Just as a goldsmith or his apprentice knows, on holding the scales, that so much has dipped down and so much has tilted up, one knows income and expenditure.  	If one with small income were to lead an extravagant life there would be those who would say: "He enjoys his wealth like a wood-apple eater."  Likewise, if one with a good income were to be miserly, there would be those who would say: "He will die like a beggar."  	There are four channels through which the wealth one has collected is lost:  debauchery, drunkenness, gambling and friendship with evildoers.  	Imagine there were a great tank of water with four inlets and outlets, and a man was to close the inlets but keep the outlets open.  If there were no rain we could expect the water to decrease.  In the same way, there are the four channels through which wealth is lost.  There are these four channels through which the wealth one has collected is preserved:  avoidance of debauchery, drunkenness, gambling and friendship with evildoers.  	Imagine there were a great tank of water with four inlets and outlets, and a man was to keep the inlets open and close the outlets.  If he did this and there were good rainfall, we could expect the water to increase.  In the same way, there are these four channels through which wealth is preserved.[5]	95.	There are these three unskillful types of thought.  What three?  Thoughts of self-esteem, thoughts of gains, honours and fame and thoughts of worrying about others.[6]	96.	These five trades ought not to be practised by a layman.  What five?  Trade in weapons, trade in human beings, trade in flesh, trade in alcohol and trade in poisons.[7]	97.	Possessed of four qualities, one is understood as being a good person.  What four?	Concerning this, the good person does not speak of what is to the discredit of another, even when asked.  What then when unasked?  If, however, on being questioned, he is required to speak, then with reserve he dispraises the other person, with hesitation and in brief.  This is the meaning of the saying: "This person is good."	Again, the good person, even when unasked, speaks of what is to the credit of another.  What then when asked?  If, however, on being questioned, he is required to speak, then without reserve he praises the other person without hesitation and in full.  This is the meaning of the saying: "This person is good."	Once again, the good person, even when unasked, speaks of what is to his own discredit.  What then when asked?  If, however, on being questioned, he is required to speak, then without reserve he speaks of what is to his own discredit without hesitation and in full.  This is the meaning of the saying: "This person is good."	Finally, the good person does not speak of what is to his own credit, even when asked.  What then when unasked?  If, however, on being questioned, he is required to speak, then with reserve he speaks of what is to his own credit, with hesitation and in brief.  This is the meaning of the saying: "This person is good."[8]	98.	Even if one should seize the hem of my robe and walk step by step behind me, if he is covetous in his desires, fierce in his longings, malevolent of heart, with corrupt mind, careless and unrestrained, noisy and distracted and with senses uncontrolled, he is far from me.  	And why?  He does not see the Dhamma, and not seeing the Dhamma, he does not see me.  	Even if one lives a hundred miles away, if he is not covetous in his desires, not fierce in his longings, with a kind heart and pure mind, mindful, composed, calmed, one-pointed and with senses restrained, then indeed, he is near to me and I am near to him.  	And why?  He sees the Dhamma, and seeing the Dhamma, sees me.	Through physically close behind,	If one is acquisitive and restless,	How far is that turbulent one from one at peace,	That burning one from one cooled,	That hankering one from one content!	But thoroughly understanding the Dhamma,	And freed from longing through insight,	The wise one, rid of all desire,	Is calm as a pool unstirred by the wind.	How close is that peaceful one to one at peace,	That cool one to one cooled,	That content one to one content![9]	99.	Whatever a Tathagata utters, speaks and proclaims between the day of his enlightenment and the day he dies, all that is factual, not otherwise, and that is why he is called "Tathagata".  [10]	100.	Whatever harm an enemy can do to an enemy, 		Or a hater to a hater,		An ill-directed mind		Causes oneself even greater harm.		No mother or father		Or any other kin		Can do greater good for oneself		Then a well-directed mind.[11]	101.	One's patience should be strengthened by thinking: "Those who have no patience are afflicted in this world and do actions that lead to affliction in the next life."  	One should think: "Although this suffering arises because of the wrong deeds of others, my body is the field for that suffering, and the actions which brought it into being are mine."  	One should think: "If there were no wrongdoers, how could I bring patience to perfection?"  	One should think: "Although he is a wrongdoer now, in the past he may have been my benefactor."  	One should think: "A wrongdoer is at the same time a benefactor because through him patience can be practised."  	One should think: "All beings are like my own children and who would get angry over the misdeeds of one's own children?"  	One should think: "He does me wrong because of some fault in myself; I should strive to remove this."[12]	102.	There are these seven conditions which overtake an angry man or woman which are gratifying and helpful to a rival.  	What seven?	Take the case of one who wishes of a rival: "I wish he were ugly."  And why?  One does not like a beautiful rival.  This person, overwhelmed and subverted by anger even though he is bathed, anointed, with trimmed hair and beard and clad in clean clothes - for all that, he is ugly because of his anger.	Then, take the case of one who wishes this of a rival: "I hope he sleeps badly."  And why?  One does not like a rival to sleep well.  This person, being overwhelmed and subverted by anger, despite lying on a bed spread with fleecy cover, spread with white blankets and woollen cover embroidered with flowers, covered by an antelope skin, with awning above and red cushions at each end - he sleeps badly because of his anger.	Again, take the case of one who wishes this of a rival: "I hope he becomes poor."  And why?  One does not like a rich rival.  This person, being overwhelmed and subverted by anger, owning whatever possessions, earned by vigour, gathered up by strength of arm and sweat of brow righteously and lawfully - the king will order them all sent to the royal treasury because he is overwhelmed by anger.	Once again, take the case of one who wishes this of a rival: "I wish he was without fame."  And why?  One does not like a famous rival.  For this sort of person, being overwhelmed and subverted by anger, whatever fame he has earned falls away because he is overwhelmed by anger.	Again, take the case of one who wishes this of a rival: "I hope he has no friends."  And why?  One does not like a rival with friends.  As for this person, being overwhelmed and subverted by anger, whatever friends, intimates, relatives and kin he has will all avoid him and keep away from him because he is overwhelmed by anger.	And finally, take the case of one who wishes this of a rival: "I hope he goes to hell."  And why?  One does not like a rival to go to heaven.  This person, overwhelmed and subverted by anger, misconducts himself in body, speech, and mind and thus goes to hell himself.	These are the seven conditions which overtake the angry man or woman which are gratifying and helpful to a rival.[13]	103.  It is like a leper with his limbs all ravaged and festering, being eaten by vermin, who tears his open sores with his nails and scorches his body over a charcoal pit.  The more he does it the more those open sores become septic, evil-smelling and putrefying, and the scratching brings only little relief.  In a similar way do beings who are not yet freed from attachment to sense pleasures, while being consumed by the craving for, and burning with the fever of sense pleasures, continue to chase after sense pleasures.  And the more they chase after them, the more they crave and burn for them, and this brings only little relief.[14]	104.	There are these six dangers associated with idleness.  Thinking: "It's too cold," one does not work.  Thinking: "It's too hot," one does not work.  Thinking: "It's too early," one does not work.  Thinking: "It's too late," one does not work.  Thinking: "I am too hungry," one does not work.  Thinking: "I am too full," one does not work.[15]	105.	When the good Gotama teaches Dhamma to the assembly in a park, he does not exalt them or disparage them; on the contrary, he delights, uplifts, inspires, and gladdens that assembly with talk on Dhamma.  The sound that comes from the good Gotama's mouth has eight qualities:  it is distinct and intelligible, sweet and audible, fluent and clear, deep and resonant.  Therefore when he instructs the assembly, his voice does not go beyond that assembly.  After being delighted, uplifted, inspired and gladdened with talk on Dhamma, they rise from their seats and depart reluctantly, keeping their eyes upon them.[16]	106.	The fool may be known by his deeds; the wise one may be known by his deeds.  Wisdom is illuminated by one's deeds.[17]	107.	The noble disciple who is utterly devoted to and has unshakable faith in the Tathagata can have no doubt or wavering concerning the Tathagata or his teachings.  And it may be expected that such a disciple will live resolute in energy, always striving to abandon bad qualities and develop the good, and that he will be energetic in exerting himself and will not drop the good.[18]	108.	There are these five ways of overcoming malice which ought to be overcome when it arises.  What five?  In whoever malice arises, in him should love be developed.  In whoever malice arises, in him compassion should be developed.  In whoever malice arises, in him equanimity should be developed.  In whoever malice arises, he should forget about it, pay it no attention.  In whomever malice arises, in him the fact that it is of his own making should be fixed in his mind and he should think: "This is of my own making, the heir of actions; actions are its matrix, actions are its kin and foundation.  And whatever one does, good or bad, one will become heir to that."	In these five ways malice should be put away.[19]	109.	I will teach you the Mirror of Dhamma which, if someone possesses, he may confidently say: "Rebirth in hell as an animal or a ghost is impossible for me.  I am a Stream-Winner, safe from falling into misery; I am bound for enlightenment."  	And what is the Mirror of the Dhamma?  Concerning this, a noble disciple has unwavering faith in the Buddha and thinks: "Such indeed is the Lord - a Noble One, a fully enlightened Buddha, with perfect knowledge and conduct, happily attained, a knower of the worlds, guide unsurpassed of men to be tamed, a teacher of gods and men, a Buddha, the Lord."  	He has unwavering faith in the Dhamma and thinks: "Beautifully taught is the Lord's Dhamma, immediately apparent, timeless, of the nature of a personal invitation, progressive, to be attained by the wise each for himself."  	He has unwavering faith in the Sangha and thinks: "Happily faring are the Lord's disciples, straightforwardly faring are the Lord's disciples, correctly faring are the Lord's disciples, methodically faring are the Lord's disciples - namely, the four pairs of individuals, the eight types of persons.  These disciples of the Lord are worthy of offerings, hospitality, gifts, salutations with folded hands; they are an incomparable source of goodness in the world."  	Also, he has the virtues that are loved by the Noble Ones - complete, perfect, spotless and pure, virtues that are freeing, praised by the wise, uninfluenced by worldly concerns and conducive to concentration.[20]	110.	One may not be skilled in the habit of other's thoughts but at least one can make this resolve: "I will be skilled in the habit of my own thoughts." This is how you should train yourself, and this is how it is done.  A woman, a man or a youth fond of self-adornment, examining his reflection in a bright, clear mirror or a bowl of clear water might see a blemish or pimple and try to remove it. And when he no longer sees it there, he is pleased and satisfied and thinks: "It is an advantage to be clean." 	In the same way, one's introspection is most fruitful in good states when one thinks: "Am I usually greedy or hateful, overcome by sloth and torpor, with excited mind or filled with doubt or anger, or am I not? Do I usually live with soiled thoughts, or clean thoughts? With body passionate or not, sluggish or full of energy, uncontrolled or well controlled?" 	If on self-examination one finds that he does live with these evil unprofitable states, then he must put forth extra desire, effort, endeavour,    exertion, energy, awareness and attention to abandon them. 	And if on self-examination he finds that he does not live with the evil unprofitable states, he should make an effort to establish those profitable states and further destroy the defilements.[21] 	111.	At that time, the Lord, having stayed as long as he liked at Benares, set out for Uruvela. Then turning off the road, he entered a woodland grove and sat down at the foot of a tree. Now at that time a group of about thirty friends of high standing and their wives were enjoying themselves in that same woodland. 	One of the friends had no wife, so a prostitute had been brought along for him, and while they were enjoying themselves she took their belongings and run away. So these friends began looking around for the woman and as they roamed about they saw the Lord at the foot of a tree. They approached him and asked: "Lord, have you seen a woman?"	"What, young men, have you to do with a woman?"	So they told the Lord what had happened and why they were looking for the woman. And the Lord said to them: "What do you think? Which is better? To seek for this woman or to seek for yourself?"	"Well then, sit down and I will teach you Dhamma."	So those friends sat down and the Lord gave a progressive talk, that is to say, on virtue, heaven, the danger, the futility and the depravity of sense pleasures and the advantages of giving them up. 	Then, when the Lord knew that their minds were ready, malleable, free from hindrance, uplifted and gladdened, he explained to them the teaching which is unique to the Buddhas-suffering, its cause, its overcoming and the way to its overcoming.[22]	112.	There are these six dangers of being addicted to gambling. In winning, one begets hatred; in losing, one mourns the loss of wealth; one's word is not accepted in court; one is avoided by both friends and officials; one is not sought after for marriage, as people say a gambler cannot support a wife.[23]	113.	Enduring patience is the highest austerity.[24]	114.	I have heard this said: "Sublime is abiding in love" and the Lord is proof of this because he is seen to abide in love.[25]	115.	Now at that time, a certain monk was suffering from dysentery, and lay where he had fallen in his own excrement. The Lord and Ananda were visiting the lodgings and they came to where the sick monk lay, and the Lord asked him: "Monk, what is wrong with you?” 	"I have dysentery."	"Is there no one to look after you?"	"No, Lord."	"Then why is it that the other monks don't look after you?"	"It is because I am of no use to them, Lord."	Then the Lord said to Ananda: "Go and fetch water. We will wash this monk." So, Ananda brought water and the Lord poured it out while Ananda washed the monk all over. Then taking the monk by the head and feet, the Lord and Ananda together carried him and laid him on a bed. Later, the Lord called the monks together and asked them: "Why, monks, did you not look after that sick monk?"	"Because he was of no use to us, Lord."	"You have no mother or father to take care of you. If you do not look after each other, who else will? He who would nurse me, let him nurse the sick."[26]	116.	Then Venerable Sariputta said: "There are these five ways of putting away malice that arises. What five?	"Take the case of a person whose ways are impure in deed but not in word. Suppose a monk who wears robes made from rags were to see a rag on the road, he would hold it with his left foot and spread it out with his right foot and try to make the best use of it and then go on his way. In the same way, one whose ways are impure in deed but not in word, his deed ought to be disregarded. Think instead about his ways that are pure.	"And concerning one whose words are impure but who is pure in deed, how should malice be put away? Suppose a man, tortured by heat, by heat overspent, wearied, craving and thirsty were to come upon a pond overgrown with mossy slime and water plants. He would plunge into the pond, scatter the water plants this way and that, cup his hands, drink and then go his way refreshed. In the same way, one whose words are impure but who is pure in deed, his words ought to be disregarded. Think instead about his ways that are pure.	"And what of one who is impure in both words and deed, but who can attain mental clarity and calm from time to time? Suppose a man, tortured by heat, by heat overspent, wearied, craving and thirsty, were to come upon a puddle in a cow's footprint. He might think to himself: 'Here is a puddle in a cow's footprint, but if I drink using my hands or a cup I will stir and churn up the mud and make it unfit to drink. What if I were to crouch down on all fours, bend low and drink as does a cow?' And so he does this. In the same way, one who is impure in both word and deed but who can attain mental clarity and calm from time to time, his words and deeds ought to be disregarded. Think only of his clarity and calm.	"And what of one whose ways are impure and who cannot even attain mental clarity and calm? Suppose a sick and ailing man, grievously ill, were going along a highway with no village in front or behind, unable to get proper food, medicine or attention, or a guide to the next village. If another man were to see him, he might feel pity and he might say to himself: 'This poor man, he should get help or he will suffer to his destruction. ' In the same way, for one whose ways are impure and who cannot even attain mental clarity and calm, pity, compassion and commiseration ought to arise and you should think: 'This poor man, he should give up the bad and develop the good, or else after death he will have a bad rebirth.'	"And concerning one whose words and deeds are pure and who has mental clarity and calm, how should malice be put away? Suppose a man, tortured by heat, by heat overspent, wearied, craving and thirsty were to come upon a pool of sweet, cool, limpid water, a lovely resting place shaded by all kinds of trees. He would plunge into the pond, bathe, drink and come out and lie there in the shade. In the same way, of this person, think about his purity and mental clarity and calm."[27]	117.	Suppose an enemy has hurt you		In his own domain.		Why should you annoy yourself		And hurt your mind in your domain?		In tears you left your family,		They who were kind and helpful always.		So why not leave behind your enemy		And the anger that brings so much harm? 		This anger which you embrace		Eats away at the very roots		Of all the virtues you strive to develop.		Who would be such a fool?		Someone else does evil deeds		And you get angry. Why?		Do you wish to copy him		And act as he does?		Suppose someone, to annoy,		Provokes you to do some evil act.		Why allow anger to arise and thus		Do exactly as he wants you to do?		If you get angry		Then maybe he will suffer, maybe not.		But by feeling anger yourself		You certainly do suffer.		If enemies blinded by anger		Are content to walk the path of woe,		Do you wish to follow them		By getting angry yourself?		If a foe provokes you		To hurt yourself by getting angry,		Let that anger subside.		Do not harm yourself needlessly.[28]	118.	Citta the householder said to the monks: "Suppose a black steer and a white steer were tied together by a rope or yoke. Now, if one were to say that the black steer was the fetter of the white one, or that the white steer was the fetter of the black one, would one be speaking rightly?"	"No, they would not, householder. They are fettered by the rope or yoke. "	"Well, in the same way, monks, the eye is not the fetter of objects, nor is the object the fetter of the eye. Rather, the desire and craving that arises owing to the pair of them, that is the fetter. The ear and sounds, the nose and smells, the tongue and tastes, the mind and thoughts are not the fetters, but rather the desire and craving that arises owing to the pairs of them, that is the fetter. "	"Good for you, householder, well said. You have the eye of wisdom that is consistent with the Buddha's deep teaching. "[29]	119.	Kimbila asked the Lord: "What is the cause, what is the reason why, after the Tathagata attains final Nirvana, the good Dhamma will last long?”	"If, after the Tathagata has attained final Nirvana, the monks and the nuns, the laymen and the laywomen live with reverence and heed to the Teacher, the Dhamma and the Sangha, live with reverence and heed to the training, to concentration, to earnestness and to goodwill, then the good Dhamma will last long."[30]	120	Some foolish people here, on being told by me: "Give this up," say: "But what is this small and insignificant matter? This recluse lays too much stress on small things." And so they do not give up that thing and they cause dissatisfaction to be nursed against me and those who do desire the training. This becomes for them a strong, solid and stout bond, a bond not easily worn away, like a thick block of wood.[]