[1]	60.	Arise! Sit up!		Of what use are your dreams?		How can you who are sick		And pierced with the arrow of grief		Continue to sleep?		Arise! Sit up!		Train yourself to win peace.		Let not the king of death,		Knowing you to be lazy,		Trick you into his realm.		Cross over this attachment,		Tied to which both gods and men are trapped.		Do not let this chance slip by,		Because for those who do,		There is only hell.		Dusty is indolence.		Dust comes in its wake.		With knowledge and vigilance,		Draw out the arrow of suffering from yourself.[2]	61.	Just as this body is supported by material food, depends upon it, cannot be without it - even so, the five hindrances are supported by their own food, depend upon it, cannot be without it. 	And what food gives rise to sense desire, or nourishes sense desire already arisen? It is unsystematic attention to the alluring features of things. 	And what food gives rise to ill-will, or nourishes ill-will already arisen? It is unsystematic attention to the repulsive features of things. 	And what food gives rise to sloth and laziness, or nourishes sloth and laziness already arisen? It is unsystematic attention to regret drowsiness, languor, heaviness after meals, laziness of mind. 	And what food gives rise to restlessness and worry, or nourishes restlessness and worry already arisen? It is unsystematic attention to irritation of mind. 	And what food gives rise to doubt, or nourishes doubt already arisen? It is unsystematic attention to things based on doubt and uncertainty.[3]	62.	Ugga, the king's chief minister, said to the Lord: "Lord, it is amazing and astonishing how rich, wealthy and opulent Migara Rohaneyya is!"	"What then, Ugga, is the amount of his treasure?"	"He has a million in gold; and of silver, who can say?"	"But is that a real treasure? Not that I say that it is not, but that is a treasure that is subject to fire, water, kings, robbers, enemies and unwanted heirs. But there are seven treasures that are not subject to such things. What seven? The treasures of faith, virtue, conscientiousness, fear of blame, learning, generosity and wisdom. These seven are not subject to fire, water, kings, robbers, enemies and unwanted heirs.[4]	63.	Giving up lying, one becomes a speaker of the truth, reliable, trustworthy, dependable, not a deceiver of the world. Giving up slander, one does not repeat what is heard here, or repeat here what is heard there, for the purpose of causing divisions between people. 	Thus, one is a reconciler of those who are divided and a combiner of those already united, rejoicing in concord, delighting in concord, promoting concord; concord is the motive of his speech. 	Giving up harsh speech, one speaks what is blameless, pleasant to the ear, agreeable, going to the heart, urbane, pleasing, and liked by all. 	Giving up useless chatter, one speaks at the right time, about the facts, to the point, about Dhamma and discipline, words worthy of being treasured up, seasonable, reasoned, clearly defined and connected to the goal.[5] 	64.	One who could but does not		Support his mother and father		In their old age-		This is a cause of one's downfall.[6]	65.	Once, the Lord dwelt among the Sakyas in the Park of the Banyan Tree at Kapilavatthu, and while there, Mahanama the Sakyan came to him and asked: "How, Lord, does one become a lay disciple?"	"When one has taken refuge in the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha, then one is a lay disciple."	"How, Lord, is a disciple virtuous?"	"When a lay disciple abstains from killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying and drinking intoxicants, then he is virtuous."	"How, Lord, does one help oneself but not others?"	"When one has achieved faith, virtue and renunciation, when one longs to see the monks, to hear the good Dhamma, to be mindful of the Dhamma once heard, when one reflects on it, knows it in both the letter and the spirit and walks in conformity with it, but one does not strive to establish such things in others, then one helps oneself but not others."	"Then how, Lord, does one help oneself and others also?"	"When one has oneself achieved faith, virtue, and renunciation and strives to establish such things in others, when one longs to see the monks, to learn the good Dhamma, to be mindful of the Dhamma once heard, when one reflects upon its meaning, knows it in both the letter and spirit and walks in conformity with it and strives to establish such things in others, then one helps both oneself and others also."[7]	66.	Suppose a bowl of water was mixed with lac, turmeric or blue or yellow dye, and suppose a man with vision were to look at his reflection in that water. He would neither know nor see it as it really is. In the same way, when one lives with the mind possessed with and overwhelmed by sensual desires and knows no refuge from it, at such times one neither knows nor sees his own welfare or the welfare of others. Chants learned by heart long ago are forgotten, to say nothing of those learned recently.	Suppose a bowl of water is heated on a fire, boiling and bubbling over, and suppose a man with vision were to look at his reflection in that water. He would neither know nor see it as it really is. In the same way, when one lives with the mind possessed with and overwhelmed by ill-will and knows no refuge from it, at such times one neither knows nor sees his own welfare or the welfare of others. Chants learned by heart long ago are forgotten, to say nothing of those learned recently.	Now, suppose a bowl of water was overgrown with mossy water plants, and suppose a man with vision were to look at his reflection in that water. He would neither know nor see it as it really is. In the same way, when one lives with the mind possessed with and overwhelmed by sloth and laziness and knows no refuge from it, at such times one neither knows nor sees his own welfare or the welfare of others. Chants learned by heart long ago are forgotten, to say nothing of those learned recently.	Again, suppose a bowl of water was whipped up by the wind, stirred up, whirled around and rippling with waves, and suppose a man with vision were to look at his reflection in that water. He would neither know nor see it as it really is. In the same way, when the mind is possessed with and overwhelmed by restlessness and worry and one knows no refuge from it, at such times one neither knows nor sees his own welfare or the welfare of others. Chants learned by heart long ago are forgotten, to say nothing of those learned recently.	Once again, suppose a bowl of water was stirred up, turbid, muddy and set in the dark, and suppose a man with vision were to look at his reflection in that water. He would neither know nor see it as it really is. In the same way, when the mind is possessed with and overwhelmed by doubt and one knows no refuge from it, at such times one neither knows nor sees his own welfare or the welfare of others. Chants learned by heart long ago are forgotten, to say nothing of those learned recently,[8]	67.	Whatever one thinks about and ponders over often, one's mind gets a leaning in that way.[9]	68.	Wherever these five are found, whether in a king or a farmer, a general, a village headman, a guild master, or leaders of the clan, growth may be expected and not decline. 	What five?	Take the case of a clansman who with wealth acquired by work and effort, gathered by strength of arm and sweat of brow, justly obtained by lawful means honours, reveres, venerates and respects his parents. They in turn regard him fondly with thoughts of love, and say: "Long life to you and may you be protected." 	Thus for one who regards his parents fondly, growth may be expected and not decline. The same is also true for his wife and children, servants and workfolk; the same obtains for those who work his fields, and his tenants, and also for the gods; the same applies to recluses and Brahmins. When he regards them fondly, they will say: "Long life to you and may you be protected."[10]	69.	And how is cleaning of the body threefold? Concerning this, one abandons killing, lays aside the rod and the knife; one lives gently, kindly and feeling compassion towards every living being. 	One abandons stealing the property of another, whether in the jungle or the village; things not given, one does not steal. 	One abandons sexual misconduct. One has no intercourse with girls under the guardianship of mother, father, brother, sister or relatives, with girls lawfully protected, already pledged to a husband, those undergoing punishment or those dressed with flowers and pledged to be married.[11]	70.	Whoever, whether at morning, noon or night, practices righteousness of body, speech and mind - they have a happy morning, a happy noon and a happy night.[12]	71.	The lord asked: "Which is greater? The little sand on my fingernail, or the great earth?" 	"Lord, greater by far is the great earth. Tiny is the sand on your fingernail. The two cannot be compared."	"So too, beings who are reborn as humans are few in number. Far greater are those who are reborn in non-human realms. Therefore, you should train yourself, thinking: "We will live earnestly."[13]	72.	Just as dawn is the forerunner, the vanguard of the rising sun, so too, possession of virtue is the forerunner, the vanguard of the rising of the Noble Eightfold Path.		[14]	73.	These three types of thought cause blindness, loss of sight and ignorance, they put an end to wisdom, are associated with trouble, and do not conduce to Nirvana. What three? Thoughts of greed, hatred and harming. These three types of thought give vision, seeing and knowledge, they increase wisdom, are associated with harmony, and conduce to Nirvana. What three? Thoughts of giving up, love and helping.[15]	74.	Then the Lord said to Maha Moggallana: "Are you drowsy, Moggallana? Are you drowsy?"	"Yes, Lord."	"Well, then, whenever the thought of laziness befalls you, pay no attention to that thought, do not dwell on it. Doing this, it is possible that it will pass.	But if, by so doing, that laziness does not pass, then you should think and reflect in your mind about the Dharma - review it in your mind as you have heard it and learned it. Doing this, it is possible that the laziness will pass.	But if, by so doing, the laziness does not pass, then you should recite the Dhamma in detail as you have heard it and learned it. Doing this, it is possible that the laziness will pass.	But if, by so doing, the laziness does not pass, then you should pull your ears and rub your limbs with the palms of your hands. Doing this, it is possible that the laziness will pass.	But if, by so doing, the laziness does not pass, then get up from your seat, and having splashed water on your face, look in all directions and gaze upward into the starry sky. Doing this, it is possible that the laziness will pass.	But if, by so doing, it does not pass, then you should firmly establish the inner perception of light - as by day, so by night; as by night, so by day. Thus with a mind that is clear and unobstructed, you should develop a radiant consciousness. Doing this, it is possible that the laziness will pass.	But if, by so doing, it still does not pass, then aware of what is in front of you and behind you, walk up and down with your senses turned inwards and your mind not straying without. Doing this, it is possible that the laziness will pass.	But if, by so doing, it still does not pass, then lie down on your right side in the lion posture with one foot on the other, mindful and clearly conscious, with the thought of rising later. After waking, you should get straight up, thinking: 'I will not indulge in the enjoyment of lying down, reclining and sleeping.' Train yourself like this."[16]	75.	If you take refuge in the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha, no fear or trembling will ever arise.[17]	76.	These four states conduce to the growth of wisdom; these four states are of great help to one who has become human. What four? Association with a good person, hearing the good Dhamma, wise attention, and behaving in accordance with Dhamma.[18]	77.	The wanderer Nandiya asked the Lord: "What conditions are there, that when developed and practised, lead to Nirvana, have Nirvana as their goal, culminate in Nirvana?"	"There are, Nandiya, eight things which, when developed and practiced, lead to Nirvana, have Nirvana as their goal, culminate in Nirvana. What eight? 	Perfect View, 	Perfect Thought, 	Perfect Speech, 	Perfect Action, 	Perfect Livelihood, 	Perfect Effort, 	Perfect Mindfulness and 	Perfect Concentration."[19]	78.	There are these five right times for striving. What five? Concerning this, one is young, youthful, blacked-haired, blessed with the beauty of youth and in the prime of life. This is the first right time for striving. 	Then, one has health and well-being, with a good digestion that is not over-hot or over-cool. This is the second right time. 	If there is no famine and the crops are good, with food easy to get and one can easily live on gleanings and favours, this is the third good time. 	When men live in friendly fellowship, harmonious as milk and water blended, without quarrels and looking upon each other with the eye of affection, this is the fourth good time. 	Again, when the Sangha dwells in friendly fellowship, content with one teaching, then there is no reviling one another, no accusation, quarrelling, contention, but they with little faith find faith, and the faith of those already faithful grows. This is the fifth time for striving.[20]	79.	Look not to faults of others,		Nor to their omissions and commissions.		But rather look to your own acts,		To what you have done and left undone.		When one looks down on another's faults,		And is always full of envy,		One's defilements continually grow;		Far is one from their destruction.		If only you would do what you teach others,		Then, being yourself controlled,		You could control others well.		Truly, self-control is difficult.		You yourself must watch yourself.		You yourself must examine yourself,		And so, self-guarded and mindful,		O monk, you will live in happiness.[21]	80.	That which is called thought, mind or consciousness arises and disappears continuously both day and night. Just as a monkey swinging through the trees grabs one branch, letting it go only to grab another, so too that which is called thought, mind or consciousness arises and disappears continuously both day and night.[22]	81.	Jambukhadaka the wanderer came to Venerable Sariputta and said to him: "They talk about Nirvana! Nirvana! But what, Sariputta, is Nirvana?"	"The destruction of greed, hatred and delusion is Nirvana."	"Is there any path, any approach that leads to Nirvana?"	"There is such a path, such an approach."	"And what is it?"	"It is, friend, the Noble Eightfold Path - Perfect View, Perfect Thought, Perfect Speech, Perfect Action, Perfect Livelihood, Perfect Effort, Perfect Mindfulness and Perfect Concentration."	"An auspicious path, an auspicious approach to the realization of Nirvana it is too, a proper occasion for earnestness."[23]	82.	Here in the world		One should train carefully in virtue,		For virtue when cultivated		Brings success near at hand.		The careful one should guard virtue,		Desiring the three types of happiness - 		The praise of others, wealth,		And heaven after death.		The virtuous one makes many friends 				Because of self-restraint,		But the immoral one, practising evil,		Is estranged from his friends.		The immoral one gains only ill-repute		And bad reputation,		The virtuous gains reputation,		Fame and praise.			Virtue is the foundation, the forerunner,		The origin of all that is good and beautiful,		And therefore one should purify one's virtue.		Virtue is the control, the restraint		And the delighting of the mind,		And thus the place where all the Buddhas cross over.		Therefore, one should purify one's virtue.		Virtue is a mighty power,		Virtue is a sharp weapon,		Virtue is the supreme adornment,		Virtue is a wonderful armour.		Virtue is a sturdy bridge,		Virtue is an unsurpassed perfume,		Virtue is the best ointment,		Sending fragrance in all directions.		Virtue is the foremost provision,		Virtue is food for the journey,		Virtue is the best vehicle		For going in any direction.[24]	83.	These three people are very helpful to others. What three? One through whom one goes for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha; one through whom one understands the Four Noble Truths; and one through whom one comes to destroy the defilements and comes to know in this very life the mind's complete freedom. These are the three persons. There are none more helpful than these three.[25]	84.	Venerable Vakkali was staying at the Potters' Shed and was suffering from a disease, sick and afflicted. Then he called his attendant and said: "Friend, go to the Lord; in my name worship his feet, tell him I am suffering from a disease and suggest that it would be good if he, out of compassion, were to come and visit me."	So the attendant went to the Lord and did what he was asked. In silence the Lord consented, and dressing himself and taking his robe and bowl, set out. Now Vakkali saw the Lord coming from a distance and struggled to rise from his bed. But the Lord saw him and said: "Enough, Vakkali. Remain in your bed. There are seats made ready. I will sit there." Having seated himself, the Lord addressed Vakkali and said: "I hope you are bearing up. I hope you are enduring. Are the pains decreasing or abating? Do they seem to be decreasing or abating?"	"No, Lord. I am not bearing up or enduring, the pains do not decrease, neither do they grow."	"Then have you any doubt or remorse?"	"Indeed, Lord, I have no doubt or remorse."	"Have you anything concerning virtue to reproach yourself about?"	"No, Lord, I have nothing to reproach myself about."	"Then you must have some worry, something to regret?"	"Concerning that, for a long time I have been wanting to see the Lord but I have not had the strength of body to do so."	"Hush, Vakkali. Why do you want to see this dirty body of mine? He who sees the Dhamma sees me and he who sees me sees the Dhamma. Truly, seeing the Dhamma, one sees me and seeing me, one sees the Dhamma."[26]	85.	I know not of any single thing so unworkable as the undeveloped mind. Indeed, the undeveloped mind is an unworkable thing. I know not of any other single thing so workable as the developed mind. Indeed, the developed mind is a workable thing.[27]	86.	Whatever has had to be done by a teacher out of compassion, for the welfare of his disciples, I have done for you. Here are the roots of the trees, here are the empty places. Meditate, do not be slothful, do not be remorseful later. These are my instructions to you.[28]	87.	Cultivate a friend whose ways are seven. What seven? He gives what is hard to give, does what is hard to do, bear what is hard to bear, he confesses his own secrets and keeps your secrets, in times of trouble he does not forsake you, and he does not forsake you when you are down.[29]	88.	And how do disciples conduct themselves towards a teacher with love, not hostility? Concerning this, the compassionate teacher teaches the Dhamma to disciples, seeking their welfare, out of compassion, saying: "This is for your welfare and happiness." His disciples listen to him, lend an ear, prepare their minds for profound knowledge, they do not turn aside or move away from the teacher's instructions. Thus do disciples conduct themselves towards a teacher with love, not hostility. 	Therefore, conduct yourselves towards me with love, not hostility, and it will be for your welfare and happiness for a long time. I shall not treat you as does the potter damp clay. Repeatedly admonishing I shall speak, repeatedly testing. One who is sound will stand the test.[30]	89.	There are three types of people in the world. What three? One who is like carving on a rock, one who is like scratching on the ground, and one who is like writing on the water. 	What sort of person is like carving on a rock? Imagine a certain person who is always getting angry and his anger lasts long, just as carving on a rock is not soon worn off by wind, water or lapse of time. 	What sort of person is like scratching on the ground? Imagine a certain person who is always getting angry but his anger does not last long, just as scratching on the ground is soon worn off by the wind, water and lapse of time. 	And what sort of person is like writing on the water? Imagine a certain person who, even though spoken to harshly, sharply, roughly, is easily reconciled and becomes agreeable and friendly, just as writing on the water soon disappears.[31]	90.	Whatever families endure long, all of them do so because of four reasons, or because of several of them. What Four? They recover what is lost, repair what is decayed, eat and drink in moderation, and they put in authority a man or woman of virtue.[]