[Version 1.01][1]	1.	If you have no satisfactory teacher, then take this sure Dhamma and practise it.  For the Dhamma is sure, and when rightly undertaken it will be to your welfare and happiness for a long time.[2]	2.	"Imagine that the whole earth was covered with water, and a man was to throw a yoke with a hole in it into the water.  Blown by the wind, that yoke would drift north, south, east and west.  Now, suppose that once in a hundred years a blind turtle would rise to the surface.  What do you think?  Would that turtle put his head through the hole in the yoke as he rose to the surface once in a hundred years?"	"It is unlikely, Lord." 	"Well, it is just as unlikely that one will be born as a human being; it is just as unlikely that a Tathagata, a Noble One, a fully enlightened Buddha should arise in the world; and it is just as unlikely that the Dhamma and discipline of the Tathagata should be taught.  But now you have been born as a human being, a Tathagata has arisen and the Dhamma has been taught.  Therefore, strive to realize the Four Noble Truths."[3]	3.	The doors of the Immortal are open.		Let them who can hear respond with faith.[4]	4.	For a disciple who has faith in the Teacher's instruction and who lives in harmony with it, his idea is: "The Teacher is the Lord; I am the disciple.  The Lord knows; I do not."  	For a disciple who has faith in the Teacher's instruction and who lives in harmony with it, the Teacher's instruction is furthering in growth, strength-giving.  The idea is: "Gladly would I have my skin, bone and sinews wither and my flesh dry up, if only I can struggle until I win that which can be won by human effort."  	For a disciple who has faith in the Teacher's instruction and who lives in harmony with it, one of two results are to be expected - profound knowledge here and now, or if there is any basis for rebirth remaining, the state of Non-Returning.[5]	5.	Unsurpassed is the Lord's way of teaching the Dhamma concerning one's proper conduct in virtue.  	One should be honest and faithful, without deception, chatter, hinting or belittling, not always ready to add gain to gain, but with the sense-doors guarded, moderate in food, a maker of peace, observant, active and strenuous in effort, a meditator, mindful, with proper conversation, steady-going, resolute and sensible, not hankering after sense pleasures, but mindful and prudent.  This is the unsurpassed teaching concerning a person's proper ethical conduct.  	This the Lord fully comprehends and beyond it nothing lies to be further comprehended.  And in such matters there is no other recluse or Brahmin who is greater or more enlightened than the Lord concerning ethical conduct.[6]	6.	"What do you think about this?" said the Lord.  "What is the purpose of a mirror?"	"It is for the purpose of reflection, sir," replied Rahula.	"Even so, an action to be done by body, speech or mind should only be done after careful reflection."[7]	7.	To sacred hills, woods and groves,		To sacred trees and shrines		Do people go, gripped by fear.		But they are not safe refuges,		Not the best refuge.		Not by going there		Is one freed from all suffering.		But whoever takes refuge		In the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha		Will understand with wisdom		The Four Noble Truths:		Suffering, its cause, its overcoming,		And the Noble Eightfold Path		Leading to its overcoming. 		And this is a safe refuge,		The best refuge.		Having taken refuge here,		One is freed from all suffering.[8]	8.	As long as the sun and the moon have not come to be, there is no shining forth of great light, no great radiance; only darkness and non-seeing prevail. There is no day or night; no months, half months or seasons are distinguishable. But when the sun and the moon have come to be, there is a shining forth of great light, great radiance; darkness and non-seeing are no more. Days, nights, months, half months and seasons come to be distinguishable.	In the same way, as long as the Tathagata, the Noble One, the fully enlightened Buddha has not come to be, there is no shining forth of great light, no great radiance; only darkness and non-seeing prevail. There is no proclaiming, no teaching, no explaining, no setting forth, no opening up, no analysis, no illuminating of the Four Noble Truths. 	But when the Tathagata, the Noble One, the fully enlightened Buddha has come to be, there is a shining forth of a great light, a great radiance; darkness and non-seeing are no more. There is a proclaiming, a teaching, an explaining, a setting forth, an opening up, an analysis, an illuminating of the Four Noble Truths.[9]	9.	I will teach you the Noble Eightfold Path; I will analyze it for you. Listen carefully and I will speak. And what is the Noble Eightfold Path? It is Perfect View, Perfect Thought, Perfect Speech, Perfect Action, Perfect Livelihood, Perfect Effort, Perfect Mindfulness and Perfect Concentration. 	And What is Perfect View? It is the knowledge of suffering, the cause of suffering, the overcoming of suffering and the way to the overcoming of suffering.	And what is Perfect Thought? It is the thought of giving up, the thought of love, and the thought of helpfulness. 	And what is Perfect Speech? It is the avoiding of lying, slanderous speech, harsh speech and idle chatter. 	And what is Perfect Action? It is the avoiding of killing, stealing and sexual misconduct.	And what is Perfect Livelihood? Concerning this, a noble disciple, by giving up wrong means of livelihood adopts a perfect livelihood. 	And what is Perfect Effort? Concerning this, one puts forth the desire, makes an effort, strives, applies the mind and directs it to prevent the arising of evil unskilled states not yet arisen, to destroy evil unskilled states that have already risen, to arouse skillful states that have not yet arisen, and finally, one puts forth the desire, makes an effort, strives, applies the mind and directs it towards the continuation, the unification, the growth, the development and the fulfillment of skillful states of mind. 	And what is Perfect Mindfulness? Concerning this, one abides contemplating body in body, feeling in feeling, mind in mind and mental states in mental states, ardent, clearly conscious so as to control the attraction and repulsion in the world. 	And what is Perfect Concentration? Concerning this one cultivates the four jhanas.[10]	10.	It is certain that a clod of earth		Thrown into the sky will fall to the ground;		So too the words of the supreme Buddha		Are always certain and reliable.		It is certain that the sun will rise		When the darkness of night fades away;		So too the words of the supreme Buddha		Are always certain and reliable.		It is certain that the lion will roar		As it emerges from its den;		So too the words of the supreme Buddha		Are always certain and reliable.[11]	11.	The doctrines of which you can say: "These doctrines do not lead to letting go, giving up, stilling, calming, higher knowledge, awakening or to Nirvana" - you can be certain that they are not Dhamma, not discipline, not the word of the Teacher.  	But the doctrines of which you can say: "These doctrines lead to letting go, giving up, stilling, calming, higher knowledge, awakening and to Nirvana" - you can be certain that they are Dhamma, they are discipline, they are the word of the Teacher.[12]	12. 	Just as the great ocean has one taste, the taste of salt, even so, this Dhamma has one taste too, the taste of freedom.[13]	13.	If beings knew as I know the results of sharing gifts, they would not enjoy their use without sharing them with others, nor would the taint of stinginess obsess the heart and stay there. Even if it were their last and final bit of food, they would not enjoy its use without sharing it, if there were anyone to receive it.[14]	14.	Mahali said to the Lord : "Sir, what is reason, what is the cause of doing, of committing an evil deed?	"Greed, hatred, delusion, not paying proper attention and wrongly directed thoughts-these are the reasons, these are the causes of doing, of committing an evil deed."	"Then what, Sir, is the reason, what is the cause of doing, of committing a beautiful deed?"	"Generosity, love, wisdom, paying attention and rightly directed thought-these are the reasons, these are the causes of doing, committing a beautiful deed."[15]	15.	What sort of Dhamma practice leads to great food for oneself? Concerning this, the noble disciple reflects: "Here am I, fond of life, not wishing to die, fond of pleasure and averse to pain. If someone were to kill me, I would not like it. Likewise, if I were to kill someone they would not like that. For what is unpleasant to me must be unpleasant to another and how could I burden someone with that?" 	As a result of such reflection one abstains from killing, encourages others to abstain from it and speaks in praise of such abstaining.	Again, the noble disciple reflects: "If someone were to steal what was mine. I would not like that. Likewise, if I were to steal what belonged to someone else they would not like that. For what is unpleasant to me must be unpleasant to another and how could I burden someone with that?" 	As a result of such reflection he abstains from stealing, encourages others to abstain from it and speaks in praise of such abstaining.	Again, the noble disciple reflects: "If someone were to have intercourse with my spouse. I would not like it. Likewise, if I were to have intercourse with another's spouse they would not like that. For what is unpleasant to me must be unpleasant to another and how could I burden someone with that?" 	As a result of such reflection one abstains from wrong sensual desire, encourages others to abstain from it and speaks in praise of such abstaining.		Once again, the noble disciple reflects: "If someone were to ruin my benefit by lying I would not like it. Likewise, if I were to ruin someone else's benefit by lying they would not like that. For what is unpleasant to me must be unpleasant to another and how could I burden someone like that?" 	As a result of such reflection one abstains from lying, encourages others to abstain from it and speaks in praise of such abstaining. 	A noble disciple reflects further: "If someone were to estrange me from my friends by slander, speak harshly to me or distract me with pointless, frivolous chatter I would not like it. Likewise, if I were to do this to another they would not like that. For what is unpleasant to me must be unpleasant to another and how could I burden another with that?"		As a result of such reflection one abstains from slander, harsh speech and pointless chatter, encourages others to abstain from it and speaks in praise of such abstaining.[16]	16.	Greed is to be slightly blamed but it is slow to change. Hatred is to be greatly blamed but it is quick to change. Delusion is to be greatly blamed and it is slow to change.[17]	17.	There are these four kinds of happiness to be won by a householder who enjoys sense pleasures from time to time and when occasion offers. What four? The happiness of ownership, the happiness of wealth, the happiness of freedom from debt and the happiness of blamelessness.			And what is the happiness of ownership? Concerning this, a householder has wealth acquired by energetic striving, won by strength of arm and sweat of brow, justly and lawfully won. When he thinks of this he feels happiness and satisfaction.			And what is the happiness of wealth? Concerning this, a householder has wealth justly and lawfully won, and with it he does many good deeds. When he thinks of this he feels happiness and satisfaction.			And what is the happiness of freedom from debt? Concerning this, a householder owes no debt large or small to anyone, and when he thinks of this he feels happiness and satisfaction.			And what is the happiness of blamelessness? Concerning this, the noble disciple is blessed with blameless action of body, speech and mind, and when he thinks of this he feels happiness and satisfaction.[18]	18.	One who is wise and disciplined,		Kindly always and intelligent,		Humble and free from pride - 		One like this will win respect.		Rising early and scorning laziness,		Remaining calm in time of strife,		Faultless in conduct and clever in actions -		One like this will win respect.		Being able to make friends and keep them,		Welcoming others and sharing with them,		A guide, philosopher and friend - 		One like this will win respect.		Being generous and kindly in speech,		Doing a good turn for others		And treating all alike - 		One like this will win respect.[19]	19.	There are these four types of persons found in the world. What four? He who is concerned neither with his own good nor the good of others, he who is concerned with good of others but not his own, he who is concerned with his own good but not the good of others, and he who is concerned with both his own good and the good of others.		Just as a stick from a funeral pyre, burning at both ends and smeared with dung in the middle, can serve no useful purpose as fuel in the village or as timber in the forest- using such a simile do I speak of the person who is concerned neither with his own good nor the good of the others. The person who is concerned with the good of others but not his own is more excellent and higher than this. The person who is concerned with his own good but not the good of others is more excellent and higher still. And he who is concerned with both his own good and the good of others- he is of these four persons the chief, the best, the topmost, the highest, the supreme.		Just as from a cow comes milk, from milk cream, from cream butter, from butter ghee, and from the skimming of ghee, and that is said to be the best- even so, the person who is concerned with his own good and the good of others is of these four persons the chief, the best, the topmost, the highest, the supreme.[20]	20.	These ten things nourish the ten things that are desirable, liked, charming and hard to win the world. What ten? Energy and exertion nourish wealth. Finery and adornment nourish beauty. Doing things at the proper time nourishes health. Friendship with the beautiful nourishes virtue. Restraint of the senses nourishes the holy life. Not quarrelling nourishes friendship. Repetition nourishes great knowledge. Lending an ear and asking questions nourishes wisdom. Study and examination nourishes the teachings. And living rightly nourishes rebirth in the heaven world.[21]	21.	If a fool was sitting in an assembly hall, in the main street or at the crossroads and people were to talk about him, and if he were one who broke the five precepts, he would think: "These people are talking about me because I have done these things." This is the first kind of anguish and dejection that the fool experiences here and now.		Again, a fool might see the king arrest a thief or wrongdoer and punish him. And upon seeing this, the fool would think: "The king is punishing this wrongdoer. Now, I have done these things also, so if the king were to know about me, he might punish me also." This is the second kind of anguish and dejection that the fool experiences here and now.		And again, while the fool is sitting in a chair, or lying on a bed or on the ground, those evil deeds that he has formerly done with body, speech or mind come to rest on him, lie on him, settle on him, just as when at evening, the shadows of the great mountain peaks come to rest, lie and settle on the ground. At such times, the fool thinks: " Oh indeed, what is lovely has not been done by me, what is skillful has not been done, I have made no refuge against the fearful. There is a place for those who have done no good, only evil, and to there I will go." And so he grieves, mourns, laments, beats his breast, cries and falls into disillusionment. This is the third kind of anguish and dejection that the fool experiences here and now.[22]	22.	Whoever follows the Dhamma		Should take no drink or encourage others to drink,		Knowing that intoxication is the result.		Because of intoxication,		The fool commits evil deeds		And makes others negligent too.		So, avoid this root of wrong,		This folly loved only by fools.[23]	23.	With four qualities the wise, intelligent, worthy person goes about - not uprooted, not lifeless, not blameworthy, not censured by the wise. What four? With good conduct of body, speech and mind, and with gratitude, with gratefulness.[24]	24.	If the one who does no wrong		Follows one who is evil,		He himself will be suspected of evil		And his reputation will decline.		According to the friends one makes,		According to who one follows,		So does one become.				Like one's associates one becomes.		Follower and following,		Toucher and touched alike,		An arrow smeared with poison		Infects those arrows that are not poisoned,		So that all are fouled.		The upright person not wishing to be soiled		Should not keep company with the fool.		If one strings a piece of putrid fish		On a blade of kusa grass,		The grass will smell putrid too;		The same with one who follows the fool.		If one wraps frankincense		In an ordinary kind of leaf,		The leaf will soon smell sweet too;		The same with one who follows the wise.		Remembering the example of the leaf wrapping		And understanding the results,		One should seek companionship with the wise,		Never with the fool.[25]	25.	A believer can be recognised by three things. What three? He desires to see those who are virtuous; he desires to hear the good Dhamma; and with a heart free from stinginess, he lives at home generous, clean-handed, delighting in giving, one to ask a favour of, one who delights in sharing things with others.[26]	26.	As regards the way in which the lord has worked for the welfare of the many, for the happiness of the many, out of compassion for the world, for the welfare and happiness of both gods and men, we find no teacher like this whether we survey the past or the present, save only the Lord.	Beautifully taught is the Lord's Dhamma, immediately apparent, timeless, of the nature of a personal invitation, progressive, to be attained by the wise, each for himself. We find none who could proclaim such a progressive teaching, whether we survey the past or the present, save only the Lord.	The Lord has clearly explained what is right and what is wrong, what is blameworthy and what is praiseworthy, what is to be followed and what is to be avoided, what is low and what is high, what is impure, what is pure and what is mixed. We find none who could so clearly explain such things, whether we survey the past or the present, save only the Lord.	The Lord has well taught to his disciples the Way leading to Nirvana and they merge into each other, Nirvana and the Way, just as the Ganges and Yamuna flow into each other and go on united. We find no teacher of the Way leading to Nirvana, whether we survey the past or the present, save only the Lord.	The Lord has gained many companions, both learners and those who have destroyed the defilements, and the Lord lives together with them, all of them rejoicing in unity. We find no teacher such as this, whether we survey the past or the present, save only the Lord.	Gifts given to the Lord result in great good, his reputation is well established so that nobles seek him out to give him gifts. But because of this, the Lord does not feel proud. We find no teacher who acts thus, whether we survey the past or the present, save only the Lord.	The Lord acts as he speaks, and he speaks as he acts. We find no teacher as consistent as this, whether we survey the past or the present, save only the Lord.	The Lord has crossed over doubt, transcended all hesitation; in regard to the goal of the holy life, he has accomplished his aim. We find no teacher who has done this, whether we survey the past or the present, save only the Lord.[27]	27.	When the sky god pours down big drops of rain, that water flows down and fills the gullies, clefts and chasms and then fills the small pools, then the big pools, then the lakes; the filling of the lakes fills the streams, the streams fill the rivers, and the great rivers fill the ocean. 	In the same way, for the noble disciple who has unwavering faith in the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha and who has virtues dear to the Noble Ones, these conditions flow onward and reach the further shore and lead to the destruction of the defilements.[28]	28.	One who wants to admonish another should first investigate: "Am I or am I not one who practices utter purity in body and speech? Am I or am I not possessed of utter purity in body and speech, flawless and untainted? Are these qualities manifest in me or not?" If they are not, there are undoubtedly people who will say: "Come now, practice correct bodily and verbal conduct yourself." There are people who would say this. 	Again, one who wants to admonish another should first investigate: "Have I developed a mind of goodwill, free from malice towards my fellows in the holy life? Is this quality established in me or not?" If he has not, there are undoubtedly people who will say: "Come now, develop a mind of goodwill yourself." There are people who would say this.[29]	29.	Many garlands can be made	 	From a heap of flowers.	 	Likewise, many good deeds can be done	 	By one born human.	     	[30]	30.	 By three things the wise person may be known. What three? He sees a shortcoming as it is. When he sees it, he tries to correct it. And when another acknowledges a shortcoming, the wise one forgives it as he should.[31]	31.	Cease to do evil, learn to do good,	 	Purify the mind -	 	This is the teaching of the Buddhas.	 	Despising none, harming none,	 	Being restrained by the monastic rules,	 	Moderation in food, living in solitude	 	And devotion to mediation -	 	This is the teaching of the Buddhas.	 	Therefore, the mediation on love	 	Should be done for oneself and others.	 	All should be suffused with love -	 	This is the teaching of the Buddhas.[]