[1]	335.	These two types of people are difficult to find in the world. What two? One who will do a favour first, and one who is grateful for a favour done.[2]	336.	Be an island unto yourselves, be a refuge unto yourselves, take for yourselves no other refuge. Let the Dhamma be your island and refuge. And how does one do this? Concerning this, one dwells contemplating the body, feeling in feeling, mind in mind, and mental objects in mental objects - ardent, clearly conscious and mindful - having put aside the attraction and repulsion of the world. And those who live like this now and after I pass away will attain the highest, but they must be anxious to learn.[3]	337.	How can someone who has gone down		To a swift-flowing river,		And who gets carried away by the current		Help others to cross?		In the same way, how can one who has not learned the Dhamma,		Not listened to the explanations of the wise,		And who is himself ignorant and filled with doubt		Help others to realize it?		Just as one who has embarked on a sturdy boat		Well-equipped with oars and rudder		Could help many others to cross		Because of his skill, thoughtfulness and experience,		In the same way, one who is wise		And who has developed himself,		Who is learned and stable, understanding Dhamma himself,		Could make others realize it, if they listen carefully.		Therefore, one should consort with the good men		Who are wise and learned,		Understanding the meaning,		Following the path and knowing the Dhamma,		And then one will attain happiness.[4]	338.	Wisdom is purified by virtue, and virtue is purified by wisdom. Where one is, so is the other. The virtuous person has wisdom, and the wise person has virtue. The combination of virtue and wisdom is called the highest thing in the world.[5]	339.	Giving up happiness and suffering and with the disappearance of former gladness and sorrow, one enters and abides in the fourth jhana which is beyond pleasure and pain and is purified by equanimity and mindfulness. One sits and suffuses, drenches, fills and permeates the whole body with that purity and clarity so that there is no spot in the entire body that is untouched by it.	Just as if a man were to sit wrapped from head to foot in a pure white garment so that no part of his body was untouched by it - in the same way, one suffuses, drenches, fills and permeates the whole body so that there is no spot untouched.[6]	340.	Happily indeed we live,		Loving amidst the hating.		Amidst those who hate		We live full of love.		Happily indeed we live,		Healthy amidst the ailing.		Amidst those who are ill		We live in perfect health.		Happily indeed we live,		Content amidst the greedy.		Amidst those who are greedy		We live in contentment.[7]	341.	The past should not be followed after,		And the future not desired.		What is past is dead and gone,		And the future is yet to come.		But whoever gains insight into things		Presently arisen in the here and now,		Knowing them, unmoved, unshaken - 		Let him cultivate that insight.[8]	342.	When in the forest amongst the roots of the trees		Or in the empty places,		Just call to mind the Buddha		And no fear of trembling will arise.		If you cannot think of the Buddha,		This best, this highest, this finest of men,		Then call to mind the Dhamma,		The well taught guide.		If you cannot think of the Dhamma,		The well taught guide,		Then think of the Sangha,		That incomparable source of good in the world.[9]	343.	Hearken to this, you who are watchful - 		Those who sleep, let them awake.		Watchfulness is better than sleep.		The watchful are free from fear.		Whoever is watchful, mindful, composed,		Peaceful, serene and happy,		Studying the Dhamma at the right time, one-pointed,		They will overcome the darkness.		Therefore rouse yourself and be wakeful.		The ardent one, discriminating, meditating,		Cuts the bonds of birth and death		And attains the highest wisdom in this very life.[10]	344.	I will teach you the burden, the taking hold of the burden, the lifting it up and the putting it down. And what is the burden? The answer is the five clinging aggregates. What five? Body, feeling, perception, mental constructs and consciousness. This is the burden. And what is the taking hold of the burden? The answer should be: it is the person of such-and-such a name, of such-and-such a village. This is the taking hold of the burden. And what is the lifting up of the burden? It is that craving for sense pleasures, craving for becoming and craving for unbecoming - that is called lifting up the burden. And what is the putting down of the burden? It is the withering and fading of craving, the giving up of craving, the renouncing of it, freedom from it, the absence of it. That is the putting down of the burden.		The five aggregates are the burden.		The seizer of the burden is man.		Taking it up is sorrow indeed,		And happiness is laying it down.		If one lays this heavy burden down		And takes up no new one,		Then he has pulled out craving, roots and all.		He is fulfilled, he is free.[11]	345.	 Now, on one occasion, the Lord, having arisen from his solitude towards evening, was seated warming his back in the westerly sunshine. Then, Venerable Ananda came to see the Lord, and while rubbing his limbs with his hands said: "Strange it is and wonderful how the skin of the Lord is no longer clear and translucent, and how all his limbs are slack and wrinkled, how his body is bent forward, and how his sense faculties and body have changed."	"So it is, Ananda. Old age is inherent in youth, sickness in health, and death in life."[12]	346.	At that time, the Lord said to the monks: "Once upon a time, a bamboo acrobat set up his pole, called to his pupil, and said: 'Now, my lad, climb the pole and stand on my shoulders.' 	'Alright, Master,' said the pupil, and he did what he was told. Then the master said: 'Now, my lad, you protect me and I will protect you, and protected and watched by each other we will do our act, get a good fee, and come down safe and sound from the bamboo pole.' 	But then, the pupil said: 'No, no, Master! That will not do. You look after yourself, and I will look after myself. Thus watched and guarded each by himself, we will do our act, get a good fee, and come down safe and sound from the bamboo pole. That is the way to do it.' 	Then the Lord said: "Just as the pupil said to the master: 'I will protect myself' - so should you practise the foundations of mindfulness which means at the same time: 'I will protect others.' By protecting oneself, one protects others. By protecting others, one protects oneself. 	And how does one, by protecting oneself, protect others? It is by the repeated and frequent practice of meditation. And how does one, by protecting others, protect oneself? It is by patience, forbearance, harmlessness, love and compassion."[13]	347.	The Tathagata does not live in abundance, he does not revert to the life of abundance, nor does he waver in his striving. The Tathagata is a perfected one, a fully enlightened Buddha. So give ear, for the Immortal has been discovered and I instruct, I teach the Dhamma.[14]	348.	The fool who listens to the Conqueror's teachings		With a hostile mind		Does not grow in the good Dhamma		Any more than a rotten seed grows in the field.		But one who listens to the Conqueror's teachings		With a joyful mind,		Having destroyed the defilements,		Realized the unshakable state,		And attained the highest peace - 		He is cooled and without defilements.[15]	349.	Then Ananda came to the Lord and said: "Half of the holy life is friendship, association and intimacy with the beautiful."	"Say not so, Ananda, say not so! It is the whole of the holy life, not half, this friendship, this association, this intimacy with the beautiful."[16]	350.	There is that condition where there is not earth, water, fire or air; where there are not the spheres of infinite space, infinite consciousness, nothingness, or the sphere of neither-consciousness-nor-unconsciousness; where there is not this world, the world beyond or both together, no sun and no moon; where there is no coming to birth, no going to death, no duration and hence no falling or arising. It is not something fixed, it does not move, it is based on nothing. This indeed is the end of suffering.[17]	351.	"Lord, there are three scents whose fragrance spreads with the wind but not against it. They are the root scent, the heartwood scent and the scent of flowers. Is there any sort of scent that spreads with the wind and against it also?"	"There is such a scent, Ananda. In whatever village or district there is a man or woman who has taken refuge in the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha and who practises the five precepts, who has a lovely nature, who lives at home with the heart free from stinginess, who is open-handed, delights in giving, being one to ask a favour of, one who delights in sharing, then recluses and Brahmins sing the praise of one like this in all the four quarters. Even the gods sing his praise. This is the sort of scent whose fragrance goes with the wind and against it also."[18]	352.	Music from a five-piece ensemble		Cannot produce as much delight		As that of a one-pointed mind		With perfect insight into things.[19]	353.	Bahiya of the Bank Garment asked the monks: "Pray, sirs, where is the Lord staying -he who is a Noble One, he who is a fully awakened Buddha?"	"The Lord has gone into the town to get alms-food."	So, Bahiya quickly left the Jeta Grove, went into Savatthi, and found the Lord in quest for alms-food. Handsome he was, good to look upon, with senses calmed, tranquil in mind, composed and controlled like a well-trained elephant.	"Sir, let the Lord teach me the Dhamma so that it will be for my welfare and happiness for a long time."	"You have come at the wrong time, Bahiya. I am getting my alms-food."	A second and a third time he asked, so the Lord answered: "This is how you must train yourself. When, in the seen there is just the seen, in the heard just the heard, in the sensed just the sensed and in the cognized just the cognized, then there will be no 'thereby', and when there is no 'thereby', there will be no 'therefore', and when there is no 'therefore', there will be no here, no there, no midway in between. That is the end of suffering."	Then and there, because of concise Dhamma teaching, Bahiya's mind was freed from the defilements.[20]	354.	Now, Venerable Bhaddiya, son of the Kaligodhas, used to go to the forest, to the roots of trees and to lonely spots, and while there, would often utter the cry: "Oh joy! Oh joy!"	Now, a great number of monks heard him do this and they thought: "Doubtless, Venerable Bhaddiya is discontented with the holy life, seeing as he enjoyed the happiness of royalty when he was a householder."	So those monks went to the Lord and told him of this, and he asked that Bhaddiya come to see him. When he came, the Lord said: "Bhaddiya, is it true as they say that you go to the forest, to the roots of the trees and to lonely spots, and that while there you often utter the cry: "Oh joy! Oh joy!"	"It is true, sir."	"And why do you do this?"	"Formerly, when I enjoyed the happiness of royalty, guards were set inside the palace and outside in the area and beyond. Yet, although I was well guarded, I lived in fear - anxious, trembling and afraid. But now that I lived in the forest, alone, I am without fear, I am assured, confident, unafraid. That is why I utter the cry: "Oh joy! Oh joy!"[21]	355.	An enlightened person is naturally endowed with a compassionate nature and disposition. He desires to alleviate the suffering that beings suffer, and is even willing to relinquish his own body or life to do so. Until he reaches his goal, he is willing to struggle and strive for a very long time on a course involving great hardship, without fear and without ever becoming disenchanted with all the suffering in the round of existence, all for the sake of the welfare of other beings.[22]	356.	There are three urgent duties of a farmer. What three? The farmer gets his fields well ploughed and harrowed very quickly. Then he puts in the seed very quickly. Then he irrigates it very quickly. But the farmer has no magic power or authority to say: "Let my crops spring up today, let them ear tomorrow and on the following day let them ripen." No! In due time this will happen. 	In the same way, there are these three urgent duties of a monk. What three? Undertaking the training in higher virtue, higher thought and higher wisdom. But he has no such magic power or authority to say: "Today, tomorrow or the next day, let my mind be free from the defilements." No! In due time this will happen as he undergoes training in these three things. Therefore you should train yourselves like this: "We shall be keen to undertake the training in these three things."[23]	357.	"That which is not yours - put it away. Putting it away will be to your welfare and happiness. And what is not yours? Body, feeling, perception, mental constructs and consciousness are not yours. So, put them away. Putting them away will be to your profit and welfare. It is just as if a man should gather up, burn, or do whatever he wanted with all the grass, sticks and branches here in Jeta Grove - would you say: ' This man is gathering us, he is burning us, he is doing what he wants with us?'"	"No, Lord."	"And why not?"	"Because this is not ourselves, it is not us."	"Even so, body, feeling, perception, mental constructs and consciousness are not yours."[24]	358.	At that time, a certain monk called Thera was living alone and commending such a life. He entered the village alone, he returned alone, he sat alone and walked alone. So, a number of other monks went and told the Lord this, and he asked them to call that monk into his presence. When he came, the Lord said to him: "Is it true as they say that you are living quite alone and that you commend such a life?"	"That is so, Lord."	"In what way do you live and commend?"	"I enter the village alone, I return alone, I sit alone and walk alone."	"That is living alone, it is true, Thera. But there is a way of bringing to perfection the solitary life that I will tell you. When the past is put away, when the future is given up and when there is no craving and desire in the present, then the solitary life has been perfected in full."[25]	359.	You should train yourselves like this, thinking: "We will be contended with no matter what robes, food, shelter or medicine we get. We will be contented with what we get and do nothing unseemly in order to get such things. If we are not able to get robes, food and so on, we will not perturb, and if we do get them we will use them without clinging and infatuation, doing no wrong in order to get them, seeing the danger in them and being wise to escaping from it." This is how you should train yourselves.[26]	360.	Since I went forth		From home into homelessness		I have not been aware of having		Any ignoble or hateful thoughts, such as:		"May they be killed, may they be slaughtered,		 May they come to harm."		Such thoughts have not crossed my mind		For a long time.		On the contrary, I am aware of thoughts of love,		Infinite, well-developed,		Practised in due order		As taught by the Buddha.		I am a friend to all, a helper to all,		Sympathetic to all beings.		I develop a mind full of love		And delight always in harmlessness.		I gladden my mind		Which is immovable and unshakable.		I develop the divine states		Not cultivated by evil men.[27]	361.	Again, it may be understood by a person's conversation whether or not he is competent to discuss things. If, on being questioned, a person evades the question, changes the subject, displays anger, malice or sulkiness, then he is incompetent to discuss things. If a person does not do these things, then he is competent to discuss.		Yet again, it may be understood by a person's conversation whether or not he is competent to discuss. If, on being asked a question a person loads scorn on and beats down the questioner, laughs at him and tries to catch him up when he falters, then he is incompetent to discuss things. If a person does none of these, then he is competent.[28]	362.	They who have faith in the Buddha have faith in the best, and for those who have faith in the best the result is the best.[29]	363.	As black gum is pointed to as the best of fragrant roots, as red sandalwood is pointed to as the best of fragrant woods, as jasmine is pointed to as the best of fragrant flowers, even so, the exhortations of the good Gotama are the highest of all teachings today.[30]	364.	There is an Unborn, an Unbecome, an Unmade, an Uncompounded. If there were not this Unborn, Unbecome, Unmade, Uncompounded, then there would be no escape from the born, the become, the made, the compounded. But as there is an Unborn, an Unbecome, an Unmade, an Uncompounded, then there is an escape from the born, the become, the made, the compounded.[31]	365.	 And the Lord said to Magandiya: "It is like a man born blind who cannot see either colour or shape, the even or the uneven, the stars, the sun or the moon. He might hear someone speaking of the pleasure of a lovely, unstained, pure white cloth, and start searching to get one. But someone might deceive him by giving him a greasy, grimy, coarse robe and by saying: 'My good man, this is lovely, unstained, pure white cloth.' He might take it and put it on. Then his friends and relations might get a physician and surgeon to make medicine for him, potions, purgatives, ointments and treatment for his eyes. Because of this he might regain his sight and clarify his vision. 	Then the desire and attachment he had for that greasy robe would go, he would no longer consider the man who gave it to him a friend. He might even consider him an enemy, thinking: 'For a long time I have been defrauded, deceived and cheated by this man." Even so, if I were to teach you Dhamma, saying: 'This is that health, this is that Nirvana,' you might come to know health, you might see Nirvana. With the arising of that vision, the desire and attachment you had for the five clinging aggregates might go. 	You might even think: 'For a long time I have been defrauded, deceived and cheated by the mind, by clinging to body, feeling, perception, mental constructs and consciouness. Conditioned by this clinging there was becoming; conditioned by becoming there was birth; conditioned by birth, old age, dying, grief, sorrow, suffering, lamentation and despair came into being. This is the origin of this whole mass of suffering."	And Magandiya said to the Lord: "I have confidence that if the good Gotama were to teach me Dhamma, I could rise from my seat no longer blind."[]