[1]	152.	And what else should be done? You should think: "Our bodily conduct must be perfectly pure, clear, open, without defect and controlled. But not because of our being pure will we exalt ourselves or disparage others." This is how you should train yourselves.[2]	153.	What are the eight bucking men and their eight faults? Concerning this, when one is reproved by one of his fellows, He pleads forgetfulness, saying: "I don't remember, I don't remember." Just as a bucking horse, when hit and urged on by his driver, bucks and twists the carriage round with his hindquarters - like that, I say, is this person.	Or, on being reproved by his fellows, he blurts out at his reprover: "What right have you to speak? Why do you think you should speak?" Just as a bucking horse jumps back and batters the carriage railing and breaks the triple bar - like that, I say, is this person.	Or, on being reproved by his fellows, he retorts: "Well, you also have done such things. Fix yourself first!" Just as a bucking horse looses his hindquarters from the pole and tramples on it - like that, I say, is this person.	Again, when one is reproved by one of his fellows, he evades the question, turns the issue aside and shows temper, anger and sulkiness. Just as a bucking horse takes the wrong road and makes the carriage sway - like that, I say, is this person.	Or again, on being reproved, he speaks to the assembly with much gesticulation. Just as a bucking horse rears high and strikes out with his hooves - like this, I say, is this person.	Yet again, on being reproved, he disregards the assembly and the reprover and continues to offend just as before. Just as a bucking horse takes no notice of his driver or the whip and pulls his bit - like this, I say, is this person.	Once again, on being reproved, he says: "I am neither guilty, nor do I care," and he annoys the assembly by his silence. Just as a bucking horse, when urged on, goes neither back nor forward, but stands still like a post - like this, I say, is this person.	And finally, when one is reproved by one of his fellows;	He says: "Sirs, why should you worry so much about me? I will give up the training and return to the ordinary life. I hope you are satisfied." Just like a bucking horse, when whipped and urged forward by the driver, draws his legs together and just sits down - like this, I say, is this person.[3]	154.	Whatever monk possesses virtue, concentration, vision, freedom through knowledge and vision - just to see such a one brings much good; just to hear about such a one brings much good. To visit him, to sit beside him, to remember what he says, and to follow him in going forth in the holy life brings much good.[4]	155.	The Brahmin Aramadanda said: "What is the cause, Master Kaccana, what is the reason why nobles, Brahmins and householders all quarrel with each other?"	"They do so because of their bondage and servitude to sensual pleasures, their attachment to and greed for sensual pleasures."	"What is the cause, Master Kaccana, what is the reason why recluses quarrel with recluses?"	"They do so because of their bondage and servitude to opinions, their attachment to and greed for opinions."[5]	156.	With four things women win power in this world, this world is in their grasp. What four? Concerning this, a woman is capable at her work, she manages the servants properly, she is loved by her husband and she guards his wealth.	And how is a woman capable at her work? Whatever her husband's home industries, whether in wool or cotton, she is deft and tireless, gifted with an inquiring turn of mind into ways and means and able to arrange and carry out the job.	And how does she manage the servants properly? Whether there be servants, messengers or workers in her husband's household, she knows the work of each and what has been done, she knows what has not been done, she knows the strengths and weaknesses of the sick, she divides the food, both hard and soft, according to their share.	And how is she loved by her husband? Whatever her husband considers unlovely, she would never do, not even to save her life.	And how does she guard her husband's wealth? Whatever money, grain, silver or gold he brings home, she secures, watches and guards; never does she steal, misuse or waste it.[6]	157.	If, in an argument, the offender and the reprover do not practise strict self-examination, you can expect that it will lead to drawn out, bitter, contentious strife, and no one will be able to live in peace. 	And how should the two parties practise strict self-examination? The offender should reflect: "I have committed some wrong and that other person saw me. When he saw, he got annoyed and said so. He rebuked me and I got annoyed and went and told the others. So, it is I who am at fault." 	And how does the reprover practise strict self-examination? The reprover should reflect: "This person has committed some wrong and I saw him. Had he not done it, I would not have seen it, but as he did it, I saw it. When I saw, I was displeased and I told him so. He got annoyed and told the others. So it is I who am at fault." 	So it is that if in an argument the offender and the reprover both practise strict self-examination, you can expect that all will be able to live in peace.[7]	158. 	These four who are accomplished in wisdom, disciplined, confident, deeply learned, Dhamma bearers who live in accordance with Dhamma - these four illuminate the Sangha. Which four? A monk, a nun, a layman and a laywoman.		Whoever is wise and full of faith, deeply learned,		Holding fast to Dhamma and living according to it -		"Light of the Sangha" they are called.		The monk well-possessed of virtue,				The nun who is widely learned,		Male and female disciples fully endowed with faith - 		It is they who illuminate the Sangha.		"Light of the Sangha" they are called.[8]	159.	 Malunkyaputtan said to the Lord:  "Sir, as I was meditating, this thought entered my mind: 'These speculative views about whether the world is infinite or whether the world is finite, whether it is both infinite and finite, whether it is neither infinite and finite; these speculative views about  whether the soul is the same as the body or different from it; these speculative views about whether the Tathagata exists after death or whether he ceases to exist, or whether he both exists and does not exist, or whether he neither exists nor does not exist - these views are not explained by the Lord, they are set aside, ignored.'  Sir, if you do not explain these views for me, I will leave this training.  If you know the answers to these questions, you should explain them to me.  And if you don't, then it would be honest to say so."	"But Malunkyaputtan, did I ever say to you:  'Come, be my disciple, and I will answer all these questions for you'?"	"No, sir"	"Then, did you ever say to me: ' I will become your disciple only if you answer all these questions'?"	"No, sir"	"So, who are you and what is your complaint, you foolish man? If one were to say that they would not become my disciple until all these views had been explained, he might be dead before it could be done. 	It is as if a man had been shot by a poisoned arrow and his friends might get a doctor to help him. And he might say:' Wait! I do not want the arrow removed until I know the name of the man who shot if, what caste he is, whether he is short or tall, fat or thin. I do not want the arrow removed until I know whether the bow that shot the arrow was a spring bow, a crossbow or a longbow. I do not want the arrow removed until I know whether it was made from reed, wood or bamboo, or whether the head of the arrow was a calf-tooth head, an ordinary head, a jagged head or an iron head.' Long before all these questions could be answered, that man would be dead. 	In the same way, if someone were to say that they would not become my disciple until all the questions about whether the world is infinite or not were answered, they might be dead before it could be done.	"Living the holy life could not be said to depend upon whether the world is infinite or not, whether it is both infinite and finite, whether it is neither infinite nor finite.  Living the holy life could not be said to depend upon whether the soul is the same as the body or different from it, and so on.  Whether the world is infinite or not, there is birth, there is aging, there is dying, there is grief, sorrow, suffering, lamentation and despair, and it is for the ending of this that I teach."	Therefore, understand as not explained what has hot been explained by me, and understand as explained what has been explained by me.  	And what has not been explained by me? All these speculative views that you ask about.  And why?  Because it is not connected with the goal, it is not fundamental to the holy life, it does not conduce to letting go, giving up, stilling, calming, higher knowledge, awakening, or to Nirvana.  	And what has been explained by me?  The Four Noble Truths.  And why?  Because it is connected with the goal, it is fundamental to the holy life, it does conduce to letting go, giving up, stilling, calming, higher knowledge, awakening, and to Nirvana."[9]	160.	 Venerable Subhuti and a believing monk came to the Lord, sat down, and the Lord said to Subhuti: "Who, Subhuti, is this monk with you?"	"Sir, he is a believer, the son of a believing disciple; he went forth from a believer's home."	"But, Subhuti, does he have the traditional characteristics of a believer?"	"Now is the time, Lord, to tell me the traditional characteristics of a believer; then I will know whether or not this monk has them".	"Then, listen carefully and I will speak.  Concerning this, a monk is virtuous, he lives restrained by the rules of training, he is well- equipped with practice, seeing danger in the slightest fault, and he follows the precepts and applies himself to them.  Furthermore, he has heard much; he learns it in mind and remembers what he has heard.  Those teachings that are beautiful in the beginning, beautiful in the middle and beautiful in the end, in both the letter and the spirit, laying down the holy life in all its perfection and purity - those teachings he listens much to, remembers, recites, ponders over and penetrates with wisdom.	"Again, he has friendship with the beautiful, fellowship with the beautiful, companionship with the beautiful.	"Again, he is pleasant to speak to, endowed with the qualities that make it easy to speak to; he is patient and clever at grasping the meaning of instructions.	"Yet again, in all dealings with his fellows in the holy life, great or small, he is clever and energetic, possessing the ability to give proper consideration to them, knowing what the right thing is and how to do it.	"Yet again, he delights in Dhamma, he rejoices greatly in higher Dhamma and higher discipline, and is pleasant to speak with about it.	"Yet again, he has resolute energy for abandoning bad qualities; he is stout and strong in acquiring good qualities, not shirking the burden of good qualities.	"Yet again, he can attain easily and without difficulty the four jhanas which are of the clearest consciousness and are connected with happiness here and now.	"Yet again, he can recall his former lives - one, two, five, ten, a hundred, and a hundred thousand.	"Yet again, with god-like vision, purified and surpassing that of ordinary men, he can see the rising and passing away of beings.	"And finally, by the destruction of the defilements, in this very life and by his own comprehension, he attains freedom of mind, freedom through wisdom and abides in it.  These, Subhuti, are the traditional characteristics of a believer."[10]	161.	 The wanderer Samandakani asked Venerable Sariputta: "Pray, your reverence, what is good and what is bad?"	"Your reverence, rebirth is bad and the ceasing of rebirth is good.  Where there is rebirth this bad may be seen: cold and heat, hunger and thirst, defecation and urination, contact with fire, rod and spear, even one's own relatives and friends one when they congregate together.  But when there is the ceasing of rebirth this good may be seen: no cold or heat, no hunger and thirst, no defecation and urination, no contact with fire, rod and spear and no abuse from one's relatives and friends when they congregate together."[11]	162.	There are these four perfect efforts.  What four? Concerning this, one generates desire to prevent the arising of evil unprofitable states that have not yet arisen.  One makes an effort, sets going energy, lays hold of and exerts the mind to this end.  	One generates desire for the abandoning of evil unprofitable states that have already arisen. One makes an effort, sets going energy, lays hold of and exerts the mind to this end.  	One generates desire for the arising of profitable states that have not yet arisen.  One makes an effort, sets going energy, lays hold of and exerts the mind to this end.  	And one generates desire for the persisting, the non-confusion, the further development, the increase, cultivation and fulfilment of profitable states that have already arisen.  One makes an effort, sets going energy, lays hold of and exerts the mind to this end.[12]	163.	 Abandon wrong.  It can be done.  If it were impossible to do, I would not urge you to do so.  But since it can be done, I say to you: "Abandon wrong."  	If abandoning wrong brought loss and sorrow, I would not urge you to do so.  But since it conduces to benefit and happiness, I urge you: "Abandon wrong."	Cultivate the good.  It can be done.  If it were impossible to do, I would not urge you to do so.  But since it can be done, I say to you: "Cultivate the good."  	If cultivating the good brought loss and sorrow, I would not urge you to do so.  But since it conduces to benefit and happiness, I urge you: "Cultivate good."[13]	164.	A teacher should look upon his pupil as a son.  A pupil should look upon his teacher as a father.  Thus, these two, united by mutual reverence and deference and living in communion together will achieve increase, growth and progress in this Dhamma and discipline.[14]	165.	One whose faith in the Tathagata is settled, fixed, established, firm, unshaken by any recluse or Brahmin, any god, Mara, Brahma or anyone in the world can truly say: "I am the true child of the Lord, born of  Dhamma, created by Dhamma, an heir of Dhamma."[15]	166.	The Lord said: "Words that have four qualities are well-spoken, not ill-spoken, faultless, not blamed by the wise.  What four?  Concerning this, one speaks words that are beautiful, not ugly; one speaks words that are right, not wrong; one speaks words that are kind, not cruel; one speaks words that are truthful, not false."		The virtuous call beautiful speech the foremost, 		Secondly comes right speech, not wrong,		Thirdly come kind words, not cruel,		And fourthly comes truthful, not false speech.	Then Venerable Vangisa moved from his seat, put his robe on one shoulder, joined his hands and said: "Something occurs to me, Lord." Then Venerable Vangisa spoke these words in praise of the Lord:		One should utter only words		Which do no harm for oneself		Or cause harm to others,		That is truly beautiful speech.		Speak kind words,		Words rejoiced at and welcomed,		Words that bear ill-will to none;		Always speak kindly to others.		Truthful speech is of the immortal.		This is an eternal law.		The virtuous stand firm on words		That are truthful, useful and right.		The Buddha speaks words that lead		To the winning of security,		The ending of sorrow, and the attaining of Nirvana.		Truly, this is the speech supreme.[16]	167.	If anyone were to say that just as a person does a deed, so is his experience determined by it, and if this were true, then living the holy life would not be possible - there would be no opportunity for the overcoming of suffering. 	But if anyone were to say a person does a deed that is to be experienced, so does he experience it, then living the holy life would be possible - there would be an opportunity for the destruction of suffering.  	For instance, a small evil deed done by one person may be experienced here in this life or perhaps not at all.  Now, what sort of person commits a small evil that takes him to hell?  Take a person who is careless in the development of body, speech and mind.  He has not developed wisdom, he is insignificant, he has not developed himself, his life is restricted, and he is miserable.  Even a small evil deed may bring such a person to hell.  	Now, take the person who is careful in development of body, speech and mind,  He has developed wisdom, he is not insignificant, he has developed himself, his life is unrestricted and he is immeasurable.  For such a person, a small evil deed may be experienced here or perhaps not at all.  	Suppose a man throws a grain of salt into a little cup of water.  That water would be undrinkable.  And why?  Because the cup of water is small.  Now, suppose a man throws a grain salt in River Ganges.  That water would not be undrinkable.  And why? Because the mass of water is great.[17]	168.	Sakka asked the Lord:  "Sir, do all recluses and Brahmins teach the same Dhamma, practise the same discipline, desire the same thing and pursue the same goal?"	"No, Ruler of the Gods, they do not. And why?  This world is made up of many and various elements, and people adhere to one or another of these elements, and become tenaciously addicted to them, saying: 'This alone is true, all else is false.'  Therefore, all recluses and Brahmins do not teach the same Dhamma, practise the same discipline, desire the same thing or pursue the same goal."[18]	169.	 And what is the power of sympathy?  There are these four bases of sympathy: generosity, kind speech, doing a good turn and treating all equally.  The best generosity is generosity with the Dhamma.  The best kind speech is teaching the Dhamma again and again to a good and attentive listener.  The best good turn is inciting, encouraging and establishing the ways of faith in those without faith, the ways of virtue in the unvirtuous, the ways of generosity in the mean, and ways of wisdom in the foolish.  The best equal treatment is the equality between Stream-Winner and Stream-Winner, between Once-Returner and Once-Returner, between Non-Returner and Non-Returner, and between Noble One and Noble One.  This is called the power of sympathy.[19]	170.	Life in the world is unpredictable and uncertain.		Life is difficult, short and fraught with suffering.		Being born, one has to die; this is the nature of the world.		With old age there is death; this is the things are.			When fruit is ripe, it may drop early in the morning.		In the same way, one who is born may die at any moment.			Just as all pots made by all the potters		End in being broken,		So it is with the life of all who are born.		Neither young nor old, foolish or wise		Will escape the trap of death.		All move towards death.		They are overcome by death.		They pass on to another world.		A father cannot save his son or a family its members.		Look! With relatives watching, with tears and crying,		Men are carried off one by one,		Like cattle to the slaughter.		So, death and aging are a natural part of the world.		Thus, the wise grieve not, seeing the nature of the world.[20]	171.	When the Ageless exists,		What do you want with sensual pleasures,		Which are bound up with old age and death?		All births everywhere		Are inseparable from sickness and death.		This is ageless, immortal;		It is the ageless immortal state,		Without grieving or enmity,		Without obstruction, without stumbling,		Without fear and without burning.		This is immortal state		Has been attained by many,		And can be attained even today.		By anyone who applies himself,		But not by those who do not strive.[21]	172.	 The Venerable Sona, meditating in solitude, thought to himself: "The Lord's disciples live in active energy and I am one of them, yet my mind is not detached and free from the defilements.  My family is rich; I can forsake the training, return to the household life, enjoy riches and do good."	Now, the Lord read his mind, and as easily as a strong man might stretch out his arm, appeared in front of Sona and said:  "What do you think, Sona?  In the past when you were at home, were you not skilled in the lute's stringed music?"	"Yes, I was, Lord".	"And when the strings were too tight, was the lute melodious and playable?"	"No, Lord."	"But when the strings were too loose, was the lute melodious and playable?"	"No, Lord."	"But when the strings were neither too tight nor too loose, but tuned to the middle pitch, was the lute then melodious and playable?"	"Yes, Lord."	"Even so, Sona, when effort is too tight it ends in flurry, and when too loose ends in idleness.  Therefore, stand firm in the balance, develop a balance in the faculties and thereby attain that which is of value".[22]	173.	Then, King Milinda said: "Venerable Nagasena, what is the characteristic of faith?"	"Faith, Sire has tranquillity and leaping forward as its characteristic."	"How is tranquillity a characteristic of faith?"	"When faith arises, it destroys the hindrances; when thought is without the hindrances, it is clear, pure and serene."	"Give me a simile."	"A king, going along a highway together with his army of four parts - elephants, cavalry, chariots and infantry - might cross a small stream, and the water disturbed by that army would become dirty, turbid and muddy.  Then, the king might say: "Bring water, good sirs; we will drink"  They might answer him, saying: "Yes, your Majesty," and taking the king's water-cleansing gem might put it in the water so that the various water plants would disappear, the mud subside and the water become clear, pure and serene.  Then they would offer the drinking water to the king, saying: "Let His Majesty drink."  	Thought is like the water, the people are like the earnest student of meditation, the defilements are like the water plants and the mud, and faith is like the water-cleansing gem.  As the water plants disappear, the mud subsides, and the water become clear, pure and serene when the water-cleansing gem is put - even so, the arising of faith destroys the hindrances and thought without hindrances is clear, pure and serene."		"How, reverend sir, is leaping forward a characteristic of faith?"		"As, Sires, the earnest student of meditation, on seeing that the minds of others are freed, leaps forward after the fruits of Stream-Winning, of Once-Returning, of Non-Returning or of Arahantship, and practises meditation for the attainment of the unattained, for the mastery of the unmastered, for the realisation of the unrealised - even so is leaping forward a characteristic of faith."		"Give me a simile."		"A great rain cloud might pour down rain on a high mountain, so that the water rushing down the incline, after filling the gullies, the valleys and the small streams on the slopes, would the fill the river, so that it would rush along, breaking its banks.  Now, if a great crowd of people were to approach that river knowing neither its width nor depth, they would stand terrified and hesitant on its bank.  Then, if a man were to approach who was confident of his own power and strength, and putting on a loincloth, were to dive into that river and cross over, too.  Even so, Sire, the earnest student of meditation, on seeing that the minds of others are freed, leaps forward after the fruits of Stream-Winning, of Once-Returning or of Arhantship, and practises meditation for the attainment of the unattained, for the mastery of the unmastered, for the realization of the unrealized, and thus is leaping forward a characteristic of faith."[23]	174.	One conceives hatred at the thought: "So-and-so has done me harm, he is doing me harm, he is going to do me harm." One conceives hatred at the thought: "So-and-so has done harm to one dear and precious to me, he is doing harm to one dear and precious to me, he is going to do harm to one dear and precious to me." 	One conceives hatred at the thought: "So-and-so has done good to one not dear and precious to me, is doing good to one not dear and precious to me, is going to do good to one not dear and precious to me." In this way, one is groundlessly annoyed.[24]	175.	Monks! Brahmins and householders are most helpful to you since they provide you with robe, bowl, lodging and seat, medicines and the necessities for sickness. You also are most helpful to Brahmins and householders, since you teach them the Dhamma that is lovely in the beginning, lovely in the middle and lovely at the end, both in letter and spirit. You proclaim to them the holy life in all its completeness and purity. Therefore, the holy life is lived in mutual dependence, for crossing the flood, for the overcoming of suffering.[25]	176.	The Buddha is like one who passes down the inheritance of the Dhamma. The good Dhamma is like that inheritance. The Sangha, which is like a group of children who are heirs of an inheritance, is heir to the inheritance of the good Dhamma.[26]	177.	Whereas some recluses and Brahmins, while living on food provided by the faithful, make their living by such low arts, such wrong means of livelihood as palmistry, fortune-telling from signs, portents, dreams, marks on the body, the gnawing of mice, using a spoon to make offerings to the fire god of rice husks, rice powder, rice grains, ghee or oil, by making offerings from the mouth or of blood, by reading the fingertips, by house lore, garden lore, skill in magic charms, casting out ghosts, earth-house lore, snake lore, poison lore, rat lore, crow lore, foretelling the length of someone's life, by making charms against arrows or by interpreting the cries of animals, the recluse Gotama abstains from such low arts, such wrong means of livelihood.[27]	178.	Just as the dawn is the forerunner, the herald of the arising of the sun - so too, friendship with the beautiful is the forerunner, the herald of the arising of the Noble Eightfold Path. When one is a friend of the beautiful, it may be expected that he will cultivate and develop the Noble Eightfold Path.[28]	179.	For one who is virtuous, in full possession of virtue, there is no need for the purposeful thought: "May I be free from remorse." Because it is natural for one who is virtuous to be free from remorse. And for one free from remorse there is no need for the purposeful thought: "May I be joyful." Because it is natural for one who is free from remorse to be joyful.[29]	180.	One who is devoted to the recollection on peace sleeps in happiness and wakes in happiness, his faculties are peaceful and his mind is peaceful, he has shame and fear of blame, he is confident, he is resolved to attain the highest state, and he is respected and revered by his fellows in the holy life. And even if he attains no higher, he is at least headed for a happy rebirth.[30]	181.	There are two people you can never repay. What two? Your father and your mother. 	Even if you were to carry them on your back and live a hundred years, supporting them, anointing them with medicines, bathing and massaging their limbs and wiping up their excrement after them, even this would not repay them. 	Even if you were to give them absolute rule over the whole world, this would not repay them. And why? Because parents do much for their children - they bring them up, nourish them, they introduce them to the world. 	But whoever encourages his unbelieving parents to believe, his immoral parents to be virtuous, his stingy parents to be generous, his foolish parents to be wise, such a one by so doing does repay, does more than repay his parents.[]