[1]	244.	Develop the meditation that is love, for by so doing, hatred will be got rid of. Develop the meditation that is compassion, for by doing so, harming will be got rid of. Develop the meditation that is sympathetic joy, for by doing so, dislike will be got rid of. 	Develop the meditation that is equanimity, for by doing so, sensory reaction will be got rid of.  Develop the meditation on the impure, for by doing so, attachment will be got rid of. Develop the meditation that is the perception of impermanence, for by doing so, the conceit "I am" will be got rid of.[2]	245.	When there is quarrelsome talk much talk may be expected, when there is much talk one is excited, being excited one is uncontrolled, and when one is uncontrolled the mind is far from concentration.[3]	246.	There are these six dangers of being addicted to drink: loss of wealth, increase in quarrels, ill health, loss of reputation, indecent exposure and impaired intelligence.[4]	247.	Giving up worldly desires, one dwells with a mind free from worldly desires and purified.  Giving up ill-will and hatred, one dwells with a mind filled with compassion and love for the welfare of all beings, and purifies the mind of ill-will and hatred.  Giving up sloth and laziness, one perceives the light, and mindful and clearly comprehending, one purifies the mind of sloth and laziness.  Giving up restlessness and worry and remaining inwardly calm, one purifies the mind of restlessness and worry. Giving up doubt, one dwells having crossed over doubt, and without uncertainty as to what is skillful, one purifies the mind of doubt.	Just as a man who had borrowed money to develop his business, and whose business had prospered, might repay the money and have enough left over to support a wife, and would think: "Before I was in debt, but now I am free from debt," and would be glad and happy because of that;	Just as a man who was sick and suffering, without appetite and weak, might in time regain his health, appetite and strength, and would think: "Before I was sick, but now I am healthy," and would be glad and happy because of that;	Just as a man who is imprisoned might, after a time, be freed without any confiscation of his property, and would think: "Before I was imprisoned, but now I am free," and would be glad and happy because of that;	Just as a man who is enslaved, not his own master, controlled by another and unable to do as he desired, and who in time would be emancipated, would think: "I was a slave, but now I am emancipated," and would be glad and happy because of that;	Just as a traveller carrying goods and wealth might find himself in a wilderness with little food and much danger, and after a time, might arrive safe and sound at the edge of a village, and would think: " Before I was in danger, but now I am safe," and would be glad and happy because of that;	In the same way, as long as the five hindrances are not given up, one feels indebted, sick, imprisoned, enslaved, lost in the wilderness.  But when the five hindrances are given up, one feels free from debt, healthy, free, emancipated and safe.  And when one knows that these five hindrances are given up, gladness arises, from gladness comes joy, because of joy the body is tranquil, with a tranquil body one is happy, and the mind of one who is happy is concentrated.[5]	248.	Possessed of two things in this very life, one lives in much ease and happiness, firmly directed towards the ending of the defilements.  What two?  Being thrilled by enthusiasm at the time for enthusiasm, and making a firm effort.[6]	249.	What is friendship with the good? It is to follow after, to frequent the company of and associate with people who are believers, virtuous, learned, generous and wise; to resort to and consort with them, to be devoted to them, enthusiastic about them, in unity with them.[7]	250.	Detached from sense pleasures and unskilled states of mind, one enters and abides in the first jhana, which has logical and wandering thought present, and is filled with a joy and happiness that is born of detachment.  And with that joy and happiness born of detachment, one suffuses, drenches, fills and permeates the whole body so that there is no spot in the entire body that is untouched by that joy and happiness born of concentration.	Just as a skilled bath-attendant or his apprentice, kneading bath powder which has been sprinkled with water, forms from it in a metal bowl a ball of foam from which no moisture escapes - in the same way, one suffuses, drenches, fills and permeates the whole body so that no spot is untouched.[8]	251.	Asurinda of the Bharadvaja Brahmin clan heard that the leader of the clan had gone forth into the Sangha of the recluse Gotama.  Angry and displeased, he went to where the Lord was and reviled and abused him with rude, harsh words.  When he had spoken, the Lord remained silent, and Asurinda said: "You are defeated, recluse, you are defeated!" The Lord replied:		The fool thinks he has won a battle		When he bullies with harsh speech,		But knowing how to be forbearing -		That makes one victorious.		The worse of the two		Is he who, when abused, retaliates.		One who does not retaliate		Wins a battle hard to win.		Knowing that the other person is angry,		One who remain mindful and calm		Acts for his own best interest		And for the other's interest, too.		He is a healer of both himself		And the other person also.		He is thought a fool only by those		Who do not understand the Dhamma.[9]	252.	Once while Ananda was dwelling near Kosambi in Ghosita Park, Bhaddaji approached and Ananda asked him: "Good Bhaddaji, what is the highest of sights, the highest of sounds, the highest of joys, the highest of conscious states, the highest becoming?"	"There is Brahma who is all-powerful, none are more powerful, all seeing, with great power and dominion.  To see Brahma is the highest of sights.  There are the gods of radiant splendour in whom joy flows and overflows and who utter a cry of "Joy! Oh joy!"  To hear this is the highest of sounds.  There are the all-lustrous gods who feel joy but who rejoice in silence, and this is the highest of joys.  There are the gods who go to the sphere of nothingness, and this is the highest of conscious states.  Then there are the gods who go to the sphere of neither-consciousness-nor-unconsciousness, and this is the highest becoming."	"But Bhaddaji, what you say is just the talk of the crowd.  Listen, pay attention, and I will speak.  If, while one looks, the defilements are destroyed, this is the highest of sights. If, while one rejoices, the defilements are destroyed, this is the highest of joy. If, while one is conscious, the defilements are destroyed, this is the highest of conscious states. If, while one becomes, the defilements are destroyed, this is the highest becoming."[10]	253.	One should not blame another		Or despise anyone for any reason anywhere.		Do not wish pain upon another		Out of either anger or rivalry.		Just as a mother protects her only child		Even at the risk of her own life,		Even so, one cultivates unbounded love		Towards all beings in the world.[11]	254.	Now, it may be that some of you think: “The Teacher's instructions have ceased.  We have no teacher anymore."  But it should not be seen like this.  That which I have proclaimed, the Dhamma and the discipline, let that be your teacher after I am gone.[12]	255.	Compassion is that which makes the heart of the good move at the pain of others.  It crushes and destroys the pain of others; thus, it is called compassion.  It is called compassion because it shelters and embraces the distressed.[13]	256.	From the day the Lord said: "Four months from now, I will attain final Nirvana", thousands of men came to wait upon him.  Those who had not yet attained the fruits of Stream-Winning could not restrain their tears; those who had not attained enlightenment experienced deep emotion, and walked around in small groups, saying: "What will we do?"  But one monk named Dhammarama kept separate from the other monks, and when asked: "What is the matter with you?" -he gave no reply.  He had thought to himself: "The Lord has said that four months from now he will attain final Nirvana and I still have not freed myself from desire.  Thus, while the Lord lives I will struggle to attain enlightenment."  	Accordingly, Dhammarama kept to himself recollecting, pondering and calling to mind the Lord's Dhamma.  The monks went to the Tathagata and said: "Reverend Sir, Dhammarama has no affection for you.  Since you announced your final Nirvana four months from now, he has nothing to do with us."  The Lord had Dhammarama called to him and asked: "Is it true what they say, that you have nothing to do with the other monks?"	"Yes, reverend sir, it is true."	"Why do you do this?"	"I do it thinking thus: the Lord has said that four months from now he will attain final Nirvana, and I have not freed myself from desire. Thus, while the Lord lives I will struggle to attain enlightenment.  Accordingly, I keep to myself, recollecting, pondering and calling to mind the Lord's Dhamma.	"Excellent, monk, excellent," said the Lord.	Then the Lord addressed the monks, saying: "Every monk should show his affection for me in the way Dhammarama has done.  They who honour me with garlands, perfume and so on honour me not; but they that practise the Dhamma in all its parts- they honour me in the best way."[14]	257.	The thought of love, of compassion, of sympathetic joy, of equanimity, if cultivated and developed, is of great fruit and profit.[15]	258.	Develop the meditation that is like water, for in so doing, pleasant and unpleasant sensory impressions that have arisen and taken hold of thought will not persist. Just as people wash away faeces and urine, spittle, pus and blood, and yet the water is not troubled, worried or disgusted - even so, develop the meditation that is like water.[16]	259.	There are these four powers. What four? The power of mindfulness, of concentration, of innocence and the power of showing kindness.[17]	260.	Do not be afraid of doing good deeds.  It is another name for happiness.  I know well that good deeds lead to a ripening, a blossoming, which is pleasing, joyous and happy for a long time.[18]	261.	These five advantages come to the virtuous man because of his practice of virtue.  What five?  Concerning this, the virtuous man, possessed of virtue, by reason of his earnestness, comes by great wealth.  The virtuous man, possessed of virtue, gains a good reputation.  	Again, the virtuous man, possessed of virtue - into whatever company he enters, whether nobles, Brahmins, householders or recluses - he does so confidently and unconfused.  	And again, the virtuous man, possessed of virtue, dies without bewilderment. And lastly, the virtuous man, possessed of virtue, after death is reborn in heaven.[19]	262.	In this way one should draw this inference from oneself: "That person who has evil desires and is in the grip of evil desires - he is unpleasant and disagreeable to me.	Similarly, if I were of evil desire and in the grip of evil desire, I would be unpleasant and disagreeable to others."  When you see this, you should make up your mind to have no evil desires.[20]	263.	"If, with full comprehension, the good Gotama teaches Dhamma to his disciples for the purification of beings, for the overcoming of sorrow and despair, for the ending of grief and dejection, for reaching the method, for the attaining of Nirvana, then will the whole world attain it, or half of it, or a third?"	At these words, the Lord was silent.  Then Ananda thought: "This person must not be allowed to think that the Lord cannot answer this all-important question."  So Ananda said: "I will give you a simile.  Imagine a walled town with strong foundations and towers and a single gate, and at that gate a watcher, shrewd and alert, who lets in known people and keeps out strangers.  As he patrols the walls, he sees there is not a hole in the wall big enough for even a cat to slip through.  And he would know that whatever creatures big or small enter or leave the town, they all do so by the gate. "  	"In the same way, as to that question of yours, that is not important to the Lord.  What he says is this: whoever has escaped, is escaping or will escape from the world, they will do it by abandoning the five hindrances, those defilements of the mind that weaken wisdom; they will do it with mind well established in the four foundations of mindfulness, and by developing the seven factors of enlightenment."[21]	264.	Whoever makes love grow boundless,		And set his mind for seeing the end of birth,		His fetters are worn thin.		If he loves even a single being,		Good will follow.		But the noble one		With compassionate heart for all mankind		Generates abounding good.[22]	265.	While on tour, the Lord arrived in due course at Parileyya, and there he stayed at the Guarded Woodland Thicket at the foot of a beautiful sal tree.  And as he meditated alone, this thought arose in the Lord's mind: "Before, when I was beset by those monks of Kosambi, those makers of contention, quarrels, arguments, and fights, those makers of legal questions within the Sangha; I did not abide in comfort.  But now that I am alone, without another, removed from those contentious monks, I do abide in comfort."	Now, at that time, a certain large bull elephant was beset by other elephants, she-elephants, calves and babes.  Then it occurred to that elephant: "Now I am beset by these other elephants. I eat grass already cropped by them, they eat the branches I break off, I drink the water they have muddied and when I crossed over at the ford they push against my body.  What if I were to live alone, secluded from the herd."  	So, the elephant left the herd and went to Parileyya, to the Guarded Woodland Thicket and the beautiful sal tree where the Lord was.  Using his trunk, he provided the Lord with water for drinking and washing, and he kept the grass down.  	Then it occurred to the elephant: "Before, when I was beset by those elephants, I did not abide in comfort.  But now that I am alone, without another, removed from the herd, I do abide in comfort."  Then, having understood his own seclusion and the mind of the elephant, the Lord uttered this verse:				In this both mighty beings agree,		The enlightened sage and the elephant,		With tusks resembling the poles of ploughs - 		Both love the solitude of the forest.[23]	266.	I do not say that the attainment of profound knowledge comes straight away; on the contrary, it comes by a gradual training, a gradual doing, a gradual practice.[24]	267.	In the Himalayas, the King of the mountains, there are tracts of land, inaccessible places, inhabited by neither monkey nor man.  There are other tracts of land, beautiful spots, where both monkey and man live.  In these places, hunters set pitch traps to catch the monkeys.  Now, the monkeys who are free from foolishness and greed keep away from the traps.  	But a foolish and greedy monkey comes along, touches it, and gets his hand stuck.  Then, thinking to free his hand, he uses the other hand, but that gets stuck, too.  To free both hands, he uses one foot which gets stuck, and then the other foot which gets stuck also.  Hoping to free both hands and feet, he uses his nose, and that gets stuck.  And so, trapped in five ways, he lies down and cries, having fallen into misfortune and ruin, being prey to the hunter who will do what he wants with him.  	This is what happens to one who roams in the domain of another.  Therefore, do not roam in another's domain, for by so doing, Mara gets access, Mara gets an opportunity.  And what is not your domain but another's?  It is the five sensual elements.  	What five?  Objects cognizable with the eye, sounds with the ear, smells with the nose, tastes with the tongue, and touches cognizable with the body - all of them desirable, pleasant, delightful, wanted, inciting passion and lust.  	And what is your own domain, your own natural territory?  It is the four foundations of mindfulness.[25]	268.	By the stopping of logical and wandering thoughts, by gaining inner tranquillity and one-pointedness of mind, one enters and abides in the second jhana, which is without logical and wandering thought, and is filled with a joy and happiness born of concentration.  And with that joy and happiness born of concentration, one suffuses, drenches, fills and permeates the whole body so that there is no spot in the entire body that is untouched by that joy and happiness born of concentration.	Just as in a pool fed by a spring, with no inlets in any direction, where the rain god sends down light showers from time to time, the cool water welling up from a spring below would suffuse, fill and permeate that pool with cool water so that no part would remain untouched by it in the same way, one suffuses, drenches, fills and permeates the whole body so that no spot is untouched.[26]	269.	Good health is the highest gain,		And contentment is the greatest wealth.		Trust is the best of kinsmen,		And Nirvana is the highest happiness.[27]	270.	The Lord approached the hermitage of the Brahmin Rammaka where a large number of monks happened to be sitting, talking about Dhamma.  The Lord stood outside the porch waiting for the talk to finish, and when it had, he coughed, knocked at the bar, the monks opened the door.  He sat down on the appointed seat and asked: "What were you talking about monks? What was the talk that has just stopped?"	"We were talking about you, Lord."	"It is good for you who are young men from good families, who have gone forth from home into homelessness, that when you meet together you speak either about Dhamma or observe noble silence."[28]	271.	There are these four ways of answering questions.  What four?  There is the question that requires a categorical reply, that which requires a counter question, that which must be put aside and that which requires a discriminating reply.[29]	272.	In what way could one say: "The recluse Gotama is an annihilationist, he teaches the doctrine of annihilation," and be speaking correctly?  I teach the annihilation of greed, hatred and delusion.  I proclaim the annihilation of evil unskilled states.  It is in this way that one could say: "The recluse Gotama is an annihilationist, he teaches the doctrine of annihilation," and be speaking correctly.[30]	273.	The Brahmin Unnabha asked Venerable Ananda: "What is the aim of living the holy life under the recluse Gotama?"	"It is for the sake of abandoning desire."	"Is there a way, a practice by which to abandon this desire?"	"There is a way - it is by means of the psychic powers of desire, energy, thought and consideration together with concentration and effort."	"If that is so, Venerable Ananda, then it is a task without end.  Because to get rid of one desire by means of another is impossible."	"Then I will ask you a question; answer as you like.  Before, did you not have the desire, the energy, the thought and consideration to come to this park?  And having arrived, did not that desire, that energy, that thought and that consideration cease?"	"Yes, it did."	"Well, for one who has destroyed the defilements, once he has won enlightenment, that desire, that energy, that thought and that consideration he had for enlightenment has now ceased."[]